 
 GREGORY BATESON, CYBERNETICS,   
 AND THE SOCIAL/BEHA VIORAL SCIENCES  
 
 ABSTRACT 
 
Gregory Bateson's interdisciplinary work in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and 
Epistemology was profoundly influenced by th e ideas set forth in systems theory, 
communication theory, information theory a nd cybernetics. As is now quite common, 
Bateson used the single term cybernetics in reference to an aggregate of these ideas that grew 
together shortly after World War II. For him,  cybernetics, or communication theory, or 
information theory, or systems theory, together constituted a unified set of ideas, and he was 
among the first to appreciate the fact that the patterns of organization and relational 
symmetry evident in all living systems are indicative of mind.  
Here, we must not forget that due to the nineteenth century polemic between science 
and religion, any consideration of purpose and plan, e.g., mental process, had been a priori 
excluded from science as non-empirical, or immeasurable. Any reference to mind as an 
explanatory or causal principle had been banned from biology. Even in the social/behavioral 
sciences, references to mind remained suspect. Building on the work of Norbert Wiener, 
Warren McCulloch, and W. Ross Ashby, Bateson realized that it is precisely mental process 
or mind which must be investigated.  
Thus, he formulated the criteria of mind and the cybernetic epistemology  that are 
pivotal elements in his "ecological philosophy."  In fact, he referred to cybernetics as an 
epistemology: e.g., the model, itself, is a means of knowing what sort of world this is, and 
also the limitations that exist concerning our ability to know something (or perhaps nothing) 
of such matters. As his work progressed, Bateson proposed that we consider Epistemology as 
an overarching discipline of the natural sciences, including the social/behavioral sciences:  a 
meta-science whose parameters extend to include the science of mind in the widest sense of 
the word. Apparently, many scholars and practitioners of the social/behavioral sciences, as 
well as the humanities, were first introduced to the cybernetic paradigm through Bateson's 
work. Yet, he seldom offered his audience more than a cursory reference to the key principles 
underlying cybernetics. Hence, the aim of this essay is to incrementally and historically 
delineate the fundamental principles underlying wh at is now often referred to as the 'first' 
cybernetics. 
 
 
 
 
Lawrence S. Bale, Ph.D. 
101 Elmwood Ave., Apt. A 
Narberth, PA  19072-2409 
ph. (610) 664-0585 
bale@pil.net 
 
 

 
 GREGORY BATESON, CYBERNETICS, 
 AND THE SOCIAL/BEHA VIORAL SCIENCES  
 
The ideas were generated in many places: in Vienna by Bertalanffy, in 
Harvard by Wiener, in Princeton by von Neumann, in Bell Telephone labs by 
Shannon, in Cambridge by Craik, and so on. All these separate developments 
dealt with communicational problems, especially with the problem of what 
sort of thing is an organized system.1 [emphasis mine] 
 —Gregory Bateson 
 
Gregory Bateson was among the first to appr eciate the fact that the patterns of 
organization and relational symmetry evident in all living systems are indicative of mind. 
Here, we must not forget that due to the ni neteenth century polemic between science and 
religion, any consideration of purpose and plan, e.g., mental process, had been a priori  
excluded from science as non-empirical, or immeasurable. Any reference to mind as an 
explanatory or causal principle had been banned from biology. Even in the social/behavioral 
sciences, references to mind remained suspect. Building on the work of Norbert Wiener, W. 
Ross Ashby and Warren McCulloch,
2 Bateson realized that it is precisely mental process or 
mind which must be investigated. Thus, he formulated the criteria of mind and the cybernetic 
epistemology that are pivotal elements in his "ecological philosophy." In fact, he referred to 
cybernetics as an epistemology: e.g., the model, itself, is a means of knowing what sort of 
world this is, and also the limitations that exist concerning our ability to know something (or 
perhaps nothing) of such matters. As his work  progressed, he proposed that we consider 
Epistemology as an overarching discipline of the natural sciences, including the 
social/behavioral sciences: a meta-science whose parameters extend to include the science of 
mind in the widest sense of the word. 
With its focus on communication and informa tion as the key elements of the selfregulation and self-organization in cybernetic systems, the cybernetic paradigm exemplifies 
the hierarchical patterns of organization evident in living systems. The elaborate differences 
of pattern, organization and symmetry embodied in living systems are also indicative of 
mental process. Thus, Bateson employed the aggregate of ideas referred to under the rubric 
of cybernetics as a unifying model of mental phenomena, and as a tool for "mapping" and 
explaining the previously inaccessible "territory" of mind. Taking his lead particularly from 

Warren McCulloch,3 Bateson's work led to the conclusi on that epistemology is, in fact, a 
normative branch of natural history . Fo r Bateson, McCulloch' s work had "pulled 
epistemology down out of the realm s of abst ract philosophy into the m uch more simple 
realm of natural history," and established "that, to understand human beings, even at a very 
elementary level, you had to know the limitations of their sensory input."4 
Apparently, many scholars and practitioners of the social/behavioral sciences, as well 
as the hum anities (m yself included), were first introduced to the cybernetic paradigm  
through Bateson's work. Yet, he seldom offered his audience more than a cursory reference 
to the key principles underlying cybernetics. Hence, the aim of this essay is to delineate the 
fundamental principles underlying what is now of ten referred to as the ' first' cybernetics. 
Clearly, Bateson' s interdisciplinary work in Anthropology, Psychiatry , Evolution, and 
Epistemology was profoundly influenced by th e ideas set forth in system s theory , 
communication theory , inform ation theory a nd cybernetics. As is now quite com mon, 
Bateson used the single term cybernetics in reference to an aggregate of these ideas that grew 
together shortly after World War II, and for him, cybernetics, or communication theory, or 
information theory, or systems theory, together constituted a unified set of ideas.  The 
quotation headlining this essay is intended to indicate that our topic deals with essentially 
communicational pr oblems, "especially with the problem  of what sort of ' thing' is an 
organized system," i.e., a mind system, a communications system, a social system, and an 
ecosystem. Since we will be considering an aggregate of  disciplines, I proceed 
chronologically, with the first of these disciplines to emerge, i.e., general systems theory, and 
then move to consider how the recursive regularities of negative and positive f eedback 
mechanisms, and circular causal system s (principles established f irst in m athematics, 
communication theory , and inform ation theory) 5 led Norbert Wiener to coin the term  
cybernetics, and serendipitously offered a firmer theoretical foundation for systems theory. 
 
 
2
 

The Classical Paradigm of Science, and the 
Emergence of General Systems Theory 
General system s theory em erged out of the need to m ap and explain biological 
phenomena that cannot be suitably understood us ing the classical m echanistic model of 
reality. "The analytic, m echanistic, one-way causal paradigm of classical science," as the 
Austrian biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy describes it, assumes that reality can be quantifiably analyzed; that a whole can be understood in terms of its parts; and that the nature and 
function of a substance or an organism can be comprehended by reducing it to its material, 
externally observable components.6  
Systems analysis acknowledges the im pressive gains in scientific inquiry, and the 
subsequent technological advances, afforded by the classical scientific paradigm. Granted, 
highly sophisticated methods of dissecting and quantifiably analyzing natural phenomena 
have provided important insights into the construction of our world. Such insights have also 
afforded a considerable, though lim ited, capacity to predict and control sm all pieces of 
reality, at a given moment in time. Yet, these gains have been achieved at considerable costs, 
costs that notably include: overspecializati on and narrow professionalism  in scientific 
research; the fracturing and fragm entation of science's vision of nature; and a subsequent 
sense of alienation from the beauty of nature's underlying unity.  
Systems analysis observes that with the cl assical paradigm of reality, wider more 
inclusive patterns interaction are disregar ded as im measurable. Also, virtually all 
considerations of purpose and plan, e.g., mental process, and final causes, are a priori  
excluded as non-em pirical, or again, im measurable. Coupled with Cartesian m ind-body 
duality, the one-way causal paradigm  of  cla ssical science assum es the nature of  a 
substance—and this includes or ganisms—is reduc ible to forces, impacts and regularities that 
are inevitably subject to the second law of thermodynamics. It also assumes that all causes, 
effects and potentialities can be traced back, in linear fashion, to initial conditions. 
While these assumptions are adequate for explaining carefully isolated phenomena, 
and the causal relationships between one "thing" and another "thing," science has found it 
difficult to apply this m odel of reality in situations displaying m ore than two variables. 7 
Mapping m ultivariable com plexes in term s of linear relations involves a piecem eal, 
 
 
3
 

fragmented analysis, in which the units invol ved are reduced to sequences of interacting 
pairs. Any process that is more complex than a hydrogen atom, with one electron orbiting its 
nucleus, embodies a complexity that escapes suf ficient explanation. This method affords 
useful information, but it cannot sufficiently map the flow of an interactive complex.  
Moreover, the successes garnered by the classical scientific paradigm  revealed its 
inadequacies. As refined tools have opened wider panoramas of research, exhibiting data of 
increasing complexity, science has been driven to search for new ways of conceptualizing 
reality. In short, the classical paradigm  of science has proven inadequate to the task of  
mapping the natural world. It is particularly inadequate when applied to describing and 
explaining the m ultivariable processes of hum an interaction, e.g., com munication, and 
humankind's intricate interrelationship with local and global ecological systems. 
Under closer observation, it has becom e evident that natural phenom ena do not 
behave as they are though subject to the narrow determinism postulated by the paradigm of 
classical science. This has led to a tangential or corollary view , a view that com pletely 
abandons causality and envisions the cosmos as random. As Joanna Rogers Macy has noted, 
the unidirectional paradigm of classical science has culminated in two distinct alternatives: 
"either we live in a clockwork universe, wholly predetermined by initial conditions, with no 
scope for genuine novelty , or the cosm os is a blind and purposeless play of atom s, and 
determinable only statistically , by the laws of  chance." 8 Macy, identif ies these dism al 
alternatives as a m ajor contributing factor in  the spiritual and psychic dislocation, or the 
sense of alienation experienced by contemporary humankind. These limited alternatives also 
serve as key barriers, blocking meaningful dialogue between science and religion. 
I should also note that while the assumptions of the classical scientific paradigm have 
provided a capacity to predict and control th e natural world, the impressive technological 
gains they af ford are lar gely responsible for a fam iliar litany of alarm ing environmental 
crises: overpopulation, pollution and degradation of the environment, global warming and 
ozone depletion, etc.9 We must recognize the role played by religion, as well as economics 
and other cultural factors, in shaping the attitudes that have fostered the ecological crisis we 
now face. S till, the now com monly held mistaken notions (concerning hum ankind's 
 
 
4
 

relationship with the biosphere, as well as what constitutes an appropriate and thoughtful 
application of scientific knowledge) are directly attributable to the myopic excesses of the 
classical scientific paradigm.  
It is one thing to fantasize that we have  the right to dom inate nature. It is quite 
another thing, when techniques developed by science actually give us the ability to play out 
our dominant fantasies: altering and destroying vast sections of the natural order evident in 
the biosphere. Hum ankind's successes in scien tific exploration have allowed for , and 
apparently encouraged, unwise intervention in natural system s that we do not f ully 
understand. Our overconfidence in the veracity  and reliability of a lim ited scientific 
paradigm, and our haste in applying tec hniques borrowed from  this m odel—notably 
prediction and control—have fostered a pseudo-scientific and overly technological culture of 
consumerism. Such have been the costs of our over-reliance on the reductionist, mechanistic, 
one-way causal paradigm of classical science. 
The perspective offered by advocates of general systems analysis identifies at least 
four areas where the inadequacy of the classi cal scientific paradigm is m ost apparently 
manifest, areas where its failings have stim ulated the developm ent and acceptance of 
systems analysis and subsequently cybernetics: 
  1. As previously noted, natural phenomena displaying a multiplicity of variables cannot be 
adequately understood through an analysis of their variables as separate entities. While 
analysis of the physical nature of differentiated "parts" comprising a whole may be useful, it 
is limited in what it reveals about the whole. Since focusing on isolated traits obscures or 
eclipses attributes characteristic of the whole, our focus should m ove to exam ining the 
combined interaction of these variables. 
  2. A linear concept of causality cannot adequa tely explain the interactions of a com plex 
system or Gestalt. The classical scientific paradigm  is suf ficient only for understanding 
carefully isolated phenom ena, where unidirec tional cause and ef fect relationships occur 
between interacting pairs, e.g., between one thing and another thing. 
  3. Entropy, or evidence of negentropic pro cesses in the growth and evolution of living 
organisms, is also a realm of explanation where the classical paradigm of science has proven 
 
 
5
 

to be inadequate. While not eluding the laws of physics, the complex interactions of biological systems involve regularities other than the second law of thermodynamics. According to 
the second law of thermodynamics, entropy always increases: with every transformation of 
energy there is a measure of that energy which is lost; therefore differences in heat become 
gradually equalized and the universe is s een as ultim ately tending toward sam eness, 
randomness and disor ganization. In the physi cal sciences, this law has never been 
contradicted or disproved, and it is generally regarded as holding a "supreme position among 
the laws of Nature."10 Yet, the second law of thermodynamics cannot adequately explain the 
evidence of continued biological negentropy. In their forms of life and patterns of interaction 
living organisms have not tended toward sameness, randomness and disorganization. Living 
systems differentiate, evolve and maintain increasingly complex forms of social and selforganization. Such self-or ganization in biol ogical phenomena has been studied since the 
1920's, and the anti-entropic evidence in the e volution of order and increased com plexity 
within biological systems simply cannot be explained with traditional linear concepts such as 
the second law of thermodynamics, where effect is understood to pre-exist in cause. 
  4. The classical paradigm of science has led to overspecialization and departmentalization, 
blocking the perception and investigation of interdependence in natural phenom ena. The 
shared presuppositions: that reality can be quantifiably analyzed; that a whole can be understood in terms of its parts; and that the nature and function of a substance or organism can be 
ascertained by dissecting it into sm aller and smaller components, has bred acute specialization. As specialists have learned "m ore and more about less and less," the separations 
between their disciplines becom e virtually im penetrable. A specificity of disciplines and 
terminology impedes communication among scientists, limiting understanding of scientific 
inquiry to a limited class of experts. Perhaps the most damaging result of over-specialization 
in scientific inquiry is that it has obstructed the perception and study of the non-substantial 
phenomena intrinsically manifest in relationships. As Ervin Laszlo notes, 
We are drilling holes in the wall of mystery that we call nature and reality on 
many locations, and we carry out delicate analyses on each of these sites. But it 
is only now that we are beginning to realize the need for connecting the probes 
with one another and gaining some coherent insight into what is there.11 
 
 
 
6
 

General Systems Analysis: 
Homeostatic and Self-Organizing 
Open Systems in the Phenomena of Life 
 
General systems theory first originated in biology, a science where the need to move 
beyond a reductionist and atomistic approach is perhaps most evident. In the 1920's, Austrian 
scientist Ludwig von Bertalanf fy directed his attention to the or ganization of organisms, 
rather than their substance—focusing on whol es, and the manner in which wholes function, 
rather than on parts. Concerning the early stages of his work von Bertalanffy wrote:  
 
[I] becam e puzzled about obvious lacun ae in the research and theory of 
biology. The then prevalent mechanistic approach . . . appeared to neglect or 
actively deny just what is essential in the phenomena of life. [I] advocated an 
organismic conception of biology whic h emphasizes consideration of the 
organism as a whole or system , and see the m ain objective of biological 
sciences in the discovery of the prin ciples of or ganization at its various 
levels.12 
 
 
Of course, von Bertalanf fy's thinking was not entirely isolated. Process-oriented, 
holistic approaches were being considered in many places. Whitehead's process philosophy, 
Jung's Gestalt therapy, and more to the point, Ca nnon's work on homeostasis (an integral 
element of systems thought) first appeared at this time.13 
Von Bertalanffy's work established that the behavior of living phenom ena is best 
comprehended in term s of wholes, rather than parts. He also discerned that biological 
wholes—anim al or vegetable; cell, organ, or organism—are best described as system s. The 
system, as described by von Bertalanf fy, is le ss a "thing" than a pattern of or ganization. 
Systems are comprised of a unified pattern of events, and their existence, as well as their 
character are derived more from the nature of their organization, than from the nature of their 
components. As such, a system  consists of a dynam ic flow of interactions that cannot 
themselves be quantified, weighed or m easured. The pattern of the whole is "nonsummative" and irreducible. Hence, as a pattern of organization, the character of a system is 
altered with any addition, subtraction or other form of perturbation in any of its constitutive 
elements.  
 
 
7
 

Doubtless, a living system is more than simply the sum of its parts. However, this 
more is not something extra, such as an elan vital or a vitalist principle. Even af ter significant disruption, an organism in nature can continue to develop in a manner normal for its 
species—evidence the fact that or ganisms can  heal them selves. Since this sort of 
phenomenon seems to contradict the classical laws of physics, giving organisms an aspect of 
independence from the external operation of cause and effect earlier biologists attributed it to 
a soul-like vitalist factor. 
 Having found this sort of explanation inadequate and unwarranted, von Bertalanffy 
attributed the phenom enon to a function of the dynam ic organization of the system  as a 
whole.14 That is, through the com bined interaction of the dif ferentiated elem ents that 
comprise the system , a new level of operati on is form ed. Nam ely, a unique status of 
existence is facilitated by the fully integrated interdependence of its "parts." Thus, the very 
nature of a system is immanent in the combined interaction of the system as a whole, and 
hence, the system's true character is lost from view when its distinguishable components are 
investigated independently of each other . Von Bertalanf fy cam e to understand that the 
organic interdependence which governs the inte rnal functioning of a living system  also 
exemplifies its relations with its environment. Whether an organism or an organ, a cell or an 
organelle, a living system  functions and e volves within a lar ger system —linked in 
relationships which em body both dependence and indispensability. Living system s both 
envelop, and are enveloped by , other living systems with which they are in steady 
communication, thus forming a natural hierarchical order. 
Thus, the diverse morphogenesis apparent in the discernable wholes studied by the 
biological sciences—or ganelle or cell, organ or organism, vegetable or animal, species or 
genus, etc.—are not only system s, they are open system s.15 They organize and sustain 
themselves by exchanging matter, energy and information with their environment. Moreover, 
it is precisely the processes involved in th ese exchanges which constitute the life and 
continuity of such living systems. For although a living system may replicate itself, no single 
component of the system is permanent.  
 
 
8
 

The manner in which these exchanges and transformations take place, the principles 
by which an incessantly changing pattern both retains its conf iguration or identity and 
evolves its order , have been a centr al focus of system s inquiry. As for what exactly is 
exchanged, since the distinctions between m atter, energy, and inform ation have becom e 
blurred, answers to this question are not entirel y clear. Yet, it is clear that all three f low 
through the system  and are subsequently transform ed by it. Von Bertalanf fy's m ajor 
discovery was that regardless of a system's material ingredients or external appearance, in 
their relational patterns and processes, the regularities or invariances which govern these 
operations are essentially the sam e. Furthermore, in maintaining and organizing itself, an 
open system is distinguished by wh at von Bertalanf fy identified as Fließ-Gleichgewicht 
(literally, "flux-balance"), or steady state. Because a living system is incessantly involved in 
processes of exchange and transformation—in st ates of inflow and outflow—the system  is 
recognized as maintaining a continual state of flux. Never stationary or fixed in chemical or 
thermodynamic equilibrium, its components are constantly altered by metabolic events.  
The terms balance and steady are here most significant. These terms underscore the 
fact that the system  m aintains itself in  tension between opposing forces—between the 
formation and the dissolution of its constitutive components, i.e., its "substance." A system 
compensates for its deterioration by importing and processing energy. Thus, it attains and 
sustains a steady balance—a dynamic equilibrium—between its own im probable state and 
the surrounding environment.16 While its elements dissipate, its pattern endures and can even 
evolve in complexity. The morphogenesis embodied in living systems exemplifies negentropic or anti-entropic qualities that apparently  defy the physical laws of nature. Living 
systems represent a successful m aintenance and increase of order within the prevailing 
thermodynamic drift toward randomness and disorganization. Their orderliness persists, not 
only in spite of disintegrative forces, but actually by means of utilizing them. 
The processes through which living systems generate and sustain order are two-fold. 
One is self -stabilizing or hom eostatic, where the continuity of  the system 's pattern or 
configuration is maintained. The other is self-organizing, where the overall pattern of the 
system itself is m odified, and its or ganization increased. Increased com plexity fosters a 
 
 
9
 

decrease in structural stability , and com plexification m oves the system  toward greater 
variety, improbability, and possible inviability. The more complex and intricately ref ined 
system is more vulnerable to physical disor ganization. Yet, this tendency is also counterbalanced by subsequent increases in the system's flexibility, and its heightened capacity to 
process information and adapt. 
Systems theorists observe that it is within closed systems, like a machine without an 
outside source of energy, that entropy inevitably increases. This highlights the fact that while 
open systems do manifest entropy, they can also import energy from their environment, and 
through orderly differentiation they can increase in complexity. Unless the universe as a whole is 
taken as one, the concept of a closed system is an abstraction that does not exist in nature.17 
 The self-organizing and homeostatic (self-stabilizing) processes exhibited by open 
systems constitute evidence of persistent phenomena which are contrary to the mechanically 
and statistically demonstrable dissolution of the universe, postulated by the second law of 
thermodynamics. Also, open systems provide evidence that demonstrates the existence of 
anti-entropic (negentropic) tendencies with in our perceived universe—negentropic 
tendencies in which order, complexity, and improbability are sustained and increased. Hence, 
we may safely assume that the existence of open systems resolves the apparent contradiction 
between data from physics which supports dissipation, disorganization and randomness, on 
the one hand, and am ple documentation of increased order and com plexity in biological 
evolution, on the other. 
Cybernetics: Circular Causal Systems 
in Biological and Social Systems 
Gregory Bateson embraced the concepts and vocabulary of cybernetics because this 
interdisciplinary field of fered a m ore rigorous  formulation of theoretical concerns with 
which his work had already been dealing. In fact, Bateson's biography offers ample evidence 
that long before he first encountered cybernetic theory, a systems approach to the biology 
and the behavioral sciences were for him not a foreign concept.18 His father William Bateson 
was a preeminent British biologist and a pioneer in the study of genetics (he introduced the 
term to the English speaking world). Of  hi s f ather, Bateson has written that he, "was 
 
 
10
 

certainly ready in 1894 to receive the cybernetic ideas."19 It is also interesting to note that as 
early as 1906, the elder Bateson had written:  
 We commonly think of anim als and plants as m atter, but they are really 
systems through which matter is continually passing. The orderly relations of 
their parts are as much under geometrical control as the concentric waves 
spreading from a splash in a pool. If we could in any real way identify or 
analyze the causation  of growth, biology woul d becom e a branch of 
physics.20 [emphasis mine] 
 
Judging from the above, it does appear that Bateson was raised in an atmosphere where the 
concerns and ideas central to systems analysis, and later cybernetics, were familiar topics. 
Moreover, at Cambridge University in the 1920's, the pattern of his education in science had 
encouraged broad, general, interdisciplinary interests.21 No doubt, having been raised and 
educated in such an environment favorably prepared Bateson for the advent of cybernetic ideas.  
Well before 1946, when he was invited to  attend the first form al conference on 
cybernetics sponsored by the Macy foundation, Bateson' s work in cultural anthropology 
dealt with the processes by which social system s or ganize and stabilize them selves. 
However, he was not satisfied with his inte rpretations of his own social anthropological 
fieldwork.22 It was not until cybernetics offered the possibility of extending the precision of 
mathematics to these processes, that he became actively involved in the movement to apply a 
variety of concepts originating in mathematics and engineering to biology and the behavioral 
sciences.23 Still, Bateson was by no means a mathematician. He understood relatively little 
mathematics and his distaste for engineering is well documented:24  
. . . his interest was in the concepts from logical and mathematical theories 
which he could use, as m etaphors or in an heuristic way , to form ulate 
conceptual schemes in the behavioral and social sciences. His tool was and is 
the English language, and he tried to achieve clarity and precision in its use, 
as far as was possible, but never mathematical rigor.25 
 
Bateson not only assimilated the conceptual schemes of cybernetics into his work, during the 
remainder of his career he refined the newly de veloped lexicon of cybernetics, so that it 
could be used with both scientific rigor and poetic imagination,26 and cybernetic principles 
became the central metaphor in his proposed meta-science of Epistemology.  
 
 
11
 

James Watt's invention of the governor  on a steam  engine (given precise 
mathematical analysis by Clerk Maxwell in 1868) and Cannon's discovery of homeostasis in 
the maintenance of the chemical balance of the blood, had already revealed the principles 
underlying the processes of self-regulation.27 These principles were more rigorously clarified 
through research initially carried out on the im provement of anti-aircraft artillery during 
World War II. To delineate further the opera tion of self-corrective or "T eleological 
Mechanisms," research was directed to the ways in which such devices receive, exchange 
and use information to adjust to m ultivariable contingencies in the environm ent. Devices 
were built that could monitor their own performance, correct for deviations and changing 
conditions, and within set parameters, alter their goals. The method used to accomplish all of 
this utilized the properties of  closed self -corrective circuits, ref erred to as f eedback 
mechanisms, and in time as cybernetics. 
The term Cybernetics was coined by Norbert Wiener, at the end of World War Two, 
in reference to the, "entire field of cont rol and com munication theory, whether in the 
machine or in the animal."28 He was, of course, referring to a remarkable set of discoveries 
concerning the nature of self-corrective machines that he and many others had made while 
working on defense projects. During the war Wiener had been part of an interdisciplinary 
team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had worked on the m athematical 
aspects of guidance and control systems for anti-aircraft fire. His earliest public use of the 
term Cybernetics was in March 1946, 29 at the f irst of  the Macy conf erences, entitled, 
"Feedback Mechanisms and Circular Causal Systems in Biological and Social Systems."30 
Ironically, it was their consideration of guided ("purposeful") anti-aircraft projectiles, and 
other weapons being developed for the war, which had alerted Wiener and his associates to 
the similarity of organisms and machines: 
Rosenblueth, Wiener, and Bigelow had, in effect, announced a new paradigm 
in science, according to which one s eeks an overarching theory to include 
machines and organisms; the theory would clearly involve ideas of information, control, and feedback.31 
 
The introduction of cybernetics as an inte rdisciplinary field led to considerable 
enthusiasm am ong the scientists who atte nded the Macy conferences. Many , including 
 
 
12
 

Bateson, believed the ideas offered were sufficiently deep, yet acceptably overarching, that 
out of them might come a vocabulary suitable as a unifying conceptual framework for the 
biological and social sciences. Norbert Wiener perhaps best captured the mood of enthusiasm 
when he wrote: 
If the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries are the age of clocks, 
and the later eighteenth and the ninet eenth centuries constitute the age of  
steam engines, the present time is the age of communication and contr ol. 
There is in electrical engineering a split . . . between the technique of strong 
currents and the technique of weak currents, and which we know as the 
distinction between power and com munication engineering. It is this split 
which separates the age just past fr om that in which we ar e now living . 
Actually, com munication engineering can deal with currents of any size 
whatever . . . what distinguishes it from power engineering is that its main 
interest is not economy of energy but the accurate reproduction of a signal.32 
[emphasis mine] 
 
Here, I want to call particular attention to the fact that in this quotation Wiener 
emphasizes the accurate reproduction of a signal, i.e., communication, as the separation 
which distinguishes cybernetics from the laws of thermodynamics. Later, when he stated that 
"the study of m essages, and in particular ef fective m essages of control, constitutes the 
science of Cybernetics,"33 Wiener was referring to the principles exhibited in the recursive 
processes of feedback. 
Clearly, the fundamental concepts of cybernetic theory include the closely related 
phenomena of com munication, inform ation, and feedback. Sim ply put, "the feedback 
principle means that behavior is scanned for its result, and that the success or failure of this 
result modifies future behavior."34 As straight forward as this may seem, the actual processes 
involved in feedback are considerably more complex. Consider the following observation 
from von Bertalanffy, 
The m inimum elem ents of a cybernetic system  are a "receptor" 
accepting stim uli (or inform ation) from  outside as input; from  this 
information a message is led to a "center" which in som e way reacts to the 
message . . . ; the center, in its turn, transmits the messages to an "effector" 
which eventually reacts to the stimulus with a response as output. The output, 
however, is monitored back, by a "feedback" loop, to the receptor which so 
senses the prelim inary response and steers the subsequent action of the 
 
 
13
 

system so that eventually the desire d result is obtained. In this way , the 
system is self-regulating or self-directing.35 
 
If we consider the tangible instances of c ybernetic systems, found both in technology and 
biology, the configurations outlined above are usually of extraordinary com plexity. Yet, 
cybernetic and system s theorists have discovere d that they can always be analyzed into 
feedback circuits.36  
According to Wiener, the operations of biological and technological system s are 
precisely parallel. "Feedback" indicates the operation of  a system whereby its actions are 
scanned by sensory receptors as one state in its cycle of operation. The system can monitor 
itself and direct its behavior: that is, the system must have a special apparatus for collecting 
information at low energy levels, and for making this information available in the operation 
of the system. These messages are not selected and conveyed in an unaltered state. Rather, 
through transform ing operations which are integral to the system , the inform ation is 
translated and encoded into a new form  that is available for further stages of the system 's 
performance. Thus, the system can modify its future behavior. "In both the animal and the 
machine this perf ormance is m ade to be effective on the outer world. In both, their 
performed action on the outer world, not merely their intended action, is reported back to the 
central regulatory apparatus."37 
The above description of feedback again indicates the extent to which the cybernetic 
paradigm employed Shannon and Weaver's information and communication theory, in which 
the pivotal concept is codification, i.e., the transformation of perceived events into symbolic 
information.38 The degree to which the principles of communication theory are integral to 
the cybernetic model are evidenced above, in  that: (a) the entire process hinges upon the 
communication of messages, e.g., information, (b) em phasis is placed upon information 
collected at low energy levels, (c) information from outside the system is not selected and 
conveyed in an unaltered state, (d) if such info rmation is to be available to the system , it 
must be transform ed, i.e., translated and encoded into a new form . At this juncture, a 
quotation from Bateson's work m ay help to illustrate the significance that Shannon and 
 
 
14
 

Weavers theories hold for cybernetic theory , and also to indicate the radical shift in 
perspective that information and communication theory require:  
This world, of communication, is a Berkeleyan world, but the good 
bishop was guilty of understatement. Relevance or reality must be denied not 
only to the sound of the tree which falls unheard in the forest but also to this 
chair which I can see and on which I am sitting. My perception of the chair is 
communicationally real, and that on which I sit is, for m e, only an idea, a 
message in which I put my trust.39 [emphasis mine]  
 
Positive Feedback, Negative Feedback 
and Mutual Causal Loops  
As we have seen, feedback is a recursiv e process whereby a system 's behavior is 
scanned and fed back through its sensory receptors. Data about the system's previous actions, 
as a part of the input it receives, is monitored, allowing the system to "watch" itself, and thus 
signal the degree of attainm ent or non-attainment of a given operation relative to pr eestablished goals. This process allows a system to alter its output and thereby regulate or 
steer its behavior in relation to its pre-encoded goals. Thus, two form s of feedback are 
recognized, negative and positive. 
Negative feedback signals the absence of deviation, or the absence of any perceived 
mismatch, between the system 's actual behavior and its tar geted goal(s). In ef fect, the 
negative m essage of "no problem " is reporte d back to the system s central regulatory 
apparatus (servomechanism, computer, autonomic nervous system, brain, etc.,) signaling that 
no change in the system's output is necessary. Thus, negative feedback stabilizes the system, 
allowing it to remain steady or constant within its prevailing course of trajectory. Conversely, 
positive feedback signals a mismatch between the system's actual behavior and its intended 
performance.40 Positive feedback messages initiate modifications in the system's operation, 
until the f eedback is again negative and the sy stem is on tar get. In f act, within highly 
complex systems, positive feedback can actually modify the goal(s), and hence the aim(s), of 
the overall system, itself. 
Before further considering the properties of negative and positive feedback, we again 
underscore the fact that cybernetics has opened new horizons for the exam ination and 
explanation of living systems. Charting the traits of negative and positive feedback loops has 
 
 
15
 

unveiled pattern-building, or isom orphisms and invariances unlike any accepted by the 
linear, or lineal paradigm that continues to dominate Western culture.41 Hence, phenomena 
such as circular and mutual causality, dynamic stability, and complexly interrelated systemic 
hierarchies are now open to more rigorous investigation.  
For many people, the analogy of feedback as a "loop" or circle may tend to suggest a 
"vicious circle," or reversion to a pre-existing state—an incessant return to the sam e point, 
and the exclusion of novelty. However, as we will discover, feedback generates information 
and innovates novelty. Through the recursive operation of negative and positive feedback, 
elements within a system, be they cells in a body or members of a society, become informed 
and differentiated. Hence, they are able to grow and evolve. 
An accessible exam ple of the cybernetic m odel is the therm ostatically controlled 
heating system. The entire unit, weather-house-heater-thermostat-homeowner, is here understood as a system of communication. The thermostat contains a thermometer (a receptor or a 
sort of sense or gan), which responds to messages or transform s of dif ference ( e.g., 
information) between a specified ideal temperature and actual changes in room temperature. 
Note that it is the hom eowner who specifies, sets or encodes, the therm ostat's ideal 
temperature. Hence, as the following obser vation from  Bateson indicates, from  one 
perspective the system's circuitry is closed; but, the system is also open to changes in both 
weather patterns and the homeowner's personal preferences. 
When the phenomena of the universe are seen as linked together by 
cause-and-effect and energy transfer, the resulting picture is of com plexly 
branching and interconnecting chains of causation. In certain regions of this 
universe (notably organisms in environments, ecosystems, thermostats, steam 
engines with governors, societies, computers, and the like), these chains of 
causation form circuits which are closed in the sense that causal interconnection can be traced around the circuit and back through whatever position was 
(arbitrarily) chosen as the starting point of the description. In such a circuit, 
evidently, events at any position in the circuit may be expected to have effect 
at all positions on the circuit at later times.  
Such systems are, however , always open: (a) in the sense that the 
circuit is energized from some external source and loses energy usually in the 
form of heat to the outside; and (b) in the sense that events within the circuit 
may be influenced from outside or may influence outside events.42 
 
 
 
16
 

In our exam ple of a cybernetic sy stem (weather -house-heater-thermostathomeowner), when the temperature of the house is too warm or too cold, the thermostat will 
respond to its own codification of the change—not to a physical ener gy transfer—and will 
signal the heater to turn of f or on, thereby equilibrating to conserve the system 's ideal 
temperature. This typifies the interactive oscillation between messages communicating the 
real to the ideal and the ideal to the real within the comprehensive circuitry of a cybernetic 
system—exem plified in steady state, hom eostasis or morphostasis. In this system  the 
messages of temperature change, i.e., deviation from the ideal, represent positive feedback, 
and are counteracted through self-stabilizing messages of control, e.g., negative feedback, 
which activate or deactivate the heating element so as to maintain a balanced approximation 
of the system's encoded ideal. 
Feedback "mechanisms" are circular and self-referential by nature. In the closed 
"circuitry" of a feedback loop, "cause" and "effect" cannot be categorically isolated. They 
modify each other in a continuous proce ss whereby input and output, percepts and 
performance, interact. This complex interaction between perception and action, evident in 
exploratory and learning behaviors, is the means by which a system—anim al or machine—
has the capacity to adapt, or ganize and increase its complexity. It is the key to a system 's 
self-organization and its self-stabilization. Thus, cybernetic models mandate explanation in 
terms of serial and reciprocal sequences of cause and effect: 
All that is required is that we ask not about the characteristics of lineal chains 
of cause and ef fect but about the ch aracteristics of system s in which the 
chains of cause and effect are circular or more complex than circular. If, for 
example, we consider a circular system containing elements A, B, C, and D—
so related that an activity of A affects an activity of B, B affects C, C affects 
D, and D has an ef fect back upon A—we find that such a system  has 
properties totally different from anything which can occur in lineal chains.43 
 
Precisely because lineal one-way causal pr emises—with categorical distinctions 
between cause and effect—can only be applied piecemeal to two variables at a tim e, they 
have proven inadequate for explaining the prope rties of circular or m ore complex than 
circular systems. The interactions of cybernetic pattern-building disclose a different kind of 
causality, one involving interdependence and reciprocal relationships between causes and 
 
 
17
 

effects. The recursive processes involved in feedback serve to link causal variables in a 
continuous flow of information and energy. Not unlike an electrical circuit, feedback loops 
connect output with input, and the inform ation they communicate sustains an interactive 
oscillation between the systems targeted ideal(s) and the success or failure of its behavior(s).  
Consequently, the circular or m ore complex than circular processes of feedback 
exhibit properties that far exceed the general notion of interaction, or the mere presence of 
influences in two directions . They function in terms of mutual causal loops, and as such, 
these influences actively influence each other—both within a given system , or a subsystem, 
and between systems. A may affect B in a way that is unrelated to B's influence on A. Yet, 
only where A's effect on B is qualified by B's effect on A (or, where A is modified by its 
effect on B), is there a feedback loop and mutual causality in a strict sense.44 
 
Regenerative Feedback, 
Deviation Amplification, 
and Cybernetic Stability 
Although developed from  work with self-c orrective, purposive or "teleological" 
machines, the application of feedback principles was quickly recognized as a valuable tool 
for describing the function of living open systems.45 In an organism, sensory signals, such as 
the pain which results from touching a hot object, constitute feedback. In social relations, 
feedback reports the result—or the perceived result— of our behavior on other persons, such 
as our perception of a smile or frown in return for our own.46 Particularly in relation to the 
self-stabilizing and self-organizing nature of a system (i.e., cybernetic stability), the mutual 
causal ef fects of feedback have been recogni zed as invaluable tools for appropriately 
explaining the interaction observed in the rela tionship of a system  with its environm ent. 
They also offer concepts with which the ex traordinary self-regulative capacities of living 
systems can be comprehended and investigated. Hence, cybernetics serendipitously provided 
a firmer theoretical foundation for general systems theory. 
Nevertheless, it should be noted that so me general system s theorists adopted 
cybernetic principles with firm reservations. For example, von Bertalanffy asserted that: 
Cybernetic systems are "closed" with respect to exchange of  matter with 
environment, and open only to inform ation. For this reason the cybernetic 
 
 
18
 

model does not provide for an essen tial characteristic of  living system s 
whose components are continually destroyed in catabolic and replaced in 
anabolic processes, with corollari es such as growth, developm ent, 
differentiation, etc.47  
 
According to von Bertalanffy, the cybernetic model introduced circular causality by 
way of the feedback loop, which accounts for the self-regulation, goal directedness, etc., of 
the system. Yet, the feedback m odel is only one, "rather special," type of self-regulating 
system; and it is too "mechanistic" in the sense that it presupposes structural arrangements 
(receptors, effectors, control center , etc.). In contrast, he m aintained that the concept of 
general systems is broader and non-mechanistic, in that regulative behavior is not determined 
by structural or "machine" conditions, but a dynamic interaction between many variables. 
John Milsum and others seem to have resolved these issues, but von Bertalanffy's resistance 
persisted.48  
Be that as is may, Von Bertalanffy's remarks do highlight some of the key objections 
voiced when the cybernetic m odel is applied to living system s. Once again, the general 
confusion regarding inform ation, m atter, and ener gy is apparent, and although von 
Bertalanffy neglects the crucial point that matter may serve as information, his objections 
underscore the fact that a sharp distinction must be drawn between matter and energy, and 
information.49 As for his claim s that the cyberne tic model does not provide for growth, 
development or differentiation, and that regula tive behavior in the feedback m odel is too 
structural and mechanistic, they are simply overdrawn.50 
Von Bertalanffy made use of the cybernetic model, and he was well aware that it is 
intended as an analogy. His objections cannot have been an instance of mistaking map for 
territory. Yet, as the founder of general systems analysis, he was inclined toward maintaining 
its uniqueness and superior comprehensiveness. In his favor, we should recognize that as a 
conscientious pioneer of scientific thought he was also concerned with avoiding overly 
ambitious applications of both general systems analysis and cybernetics.51 It is interesting to 
note that Bateson chose to avoid this particul ar mode of systems/cybernetics controversy, 
and was am ong those who integrated the elem ents shared in com mon by these "related 
disciplines." Von Bertalanffy's objections are echoed in the criticisms leveled at employing a 
 
 
19
 

cybernetic model in the social/behavioral scie nces. However, at this point m y aim is to 
delineate the prem ises upon which cybernetics is based, and attem pting to resolve these 
issues moves beyond our present topic.  
As systems theory assimilated cybernetic principles, the self-stabilization of a system 
came to be understood as an operation of the deviation-counteracting processes of negative 
feedback.52 Natural systems respond to change in the environment in much the same way as 
a therm ostat. Both adjust their behavior so as to m inimize deviations between their 
perceptions or measurements of the environment (the input) and their internal requirements 
encoded in a control center (brain, servomechanism, etc.). Thus, they maintain a steady state 
of morphostasis in the ongoing relationship of their systems' mutually affecting variables, the 
continuity of their pattern is ensured, and their systemic integrity is actively "stabilized."  
Yet, cybernetic systems exhibit a capacity for pathology and self-destruction. In the 
example of a hom e therm ostat, if the polarity of  the system 's codifier is reversed so it 
responds to positive feedback with positive feedback—increased  room temperature triggers 
the heating elem ent, which raises room  temperature and triggers the therm ostat, etc; the 
system will shift into a state of runaway , like a steam  engine without a governor , and 
exponentially self-destruct. This attr ibute of positive feedback is term ed regenerative 
feedback. If left uncorrected, it leads to pathology and ultimately self-destruction. Mapping 
and explaining the capacity for system ic pathology is a recognized contribution of 
cybernetics. Indeed, it seems Wiener focused on the study of effective messages of control, as 
constituting the science of cybernetics, precise ly because he assum ed that self-regulating 
systems tend toward entropy. Thus, in cybernetic explanation questions are framed in terms 
of what restraints are activated in order to maintain a system in steady state.53 
Although degrees of pathology are a potential consequence of positive feedback, a 
related phenom enon, oddly enough, is the system 's capacity for self-organization. This 
particular aspect of positive feedback is a result of  the deviation-amplifying processes of 
regenerative feedback. Recognized in growth, learning, and evolution, it is perhaps the most 
significant consequence of positive feedback. If there is a persistent mismatch in the mutual 
causal relationship between the environm ent and a system 's configuration (between a 
 
 
20
 

system's input and its code), such perturbations may trigger modifications in the code and the 
overall "structure" of the system, itself. Messages of deviation m ay be "interpreted" by a 
system to require increased deviation. Conse quently, the deviation-amplifying process of 
positive feedback, through which a system  m ay destroy itself, m ay also trigger 
morphogenesis —changes that reor ganize and complexify the system's overall pattern of 
operation, transforming it to a therm odynamically less probable, but a contextually m ore 
viable order of configuration and interaction.54 
Cybernetic research has convincingly dem onstrated that through the deviationamplifying mutual causal process of positive feedback, starting anywhere except the thermodynamically m ost probable equilibrium , open system s will com plexify in response to 
enduring perturbations from the environment. In short, "whenever a lasting deviation from 
uniformity (thermodynamic equilibrium) develops," a system will move toward increased 
differentiation and com plexification, and therefore, a m ore tenuous steady state. 55 It will 
adapt itself to environmental conditions by altering and complexifying its organization, and 
increased complexification in all natural systems represents movement away from systemic 
stability. That is, as a system's configuration becomes more intricately organized and more 
intimately interrelated with increased extern al variables, it becom es more sensitive and 
responsive to change, and thereby less stable. However , the em ergence of increased 
differentiation and complexification also manifests a corresponding increase in the system's 
array of available responses, or what Ervin Laszlo terms cybernetic stability—the system 's 
capacity for effective adaptation.56 
Note how the cybernetic paradigm  shifts the focus of our discourse away from : 
discreet m aterial substances, oneway causality , structure, and sum mativity. Rather , a 
cybernetic explanation focuses on: process and behavior, dynamic or animated organization, 
circular or more complex than circular causality, the mutual causal loops of feedback cycles, 
interaction between multiple variables, and emergent morphogenesis. Hence, the cybernetic 
stability of a system  must be understood not as an inactive structure, but as a pattern of 
events—an anim ated organization of exchange s and transf ormations within the system 's 
parameters. Hence, it is not the characteristics of the "parts" alone that are basic to any 
 
 
21
 

whole. Rather , it is the m anner in which the system 's dif ferentiated com ponents are 
interrelated that gives them their distinctive properties. Furthermore, within more complex 
systems the "differentiated parts" exhibit pr operties which they owe specif ically to being 
components of a larger whole. 
Through its receptors, a cybernetic system acquires and processes information and 
energy according to its needs or code. Information, energy and matter may spread through 
the system  following a fixed pathway , but they do not trigger responses and produce 
systemic behavior (output) directly. Rather, they are subject to the dynamics of the system's 
configuration, and in the circular or more complex than circular operations of a cybernetic 
circuit or network, events at any position in the circuit may be expected to have effect at all 
positions on the circuit at later times. Incoming messages are received as encoded transforms 
of perceived events, and such inform ation is translated or "interpreted" (sifted, sorted, 
evaluated and recombined) before it is conveyed to effectors and translated into action. Thus, 
the cybernetic system does not passively undergo the effects of external causes, but actively 
transforms them. It is not simply input that determines a system's behavior, but what happens 
to the input within the system, how the input is interpreted and used in terms of the system's 
organization. As Laszlo insists, "this is dir ectly contrary to linear -causality input-output 
systems."57 
Indeed, the cybernetic m odel does contradict the linear concept of  causality , 
undermining the axiom that, "similar conditions produce similar results and that different 
conditions will produce dif ferent results." Mar uyama observes that this "sacred law of 
causality in classical philosophy" has guided m uch research, leading scientists to seek 
explanations for differences between phenomena in their initial conditions, rather than in 
ongoing m utual causal interactions. 58 However , deviation-counteracting and deviationamplifying m utual causal interactions influe nce and shape events in accordance with a 
system's codes and goals. Accordingly, they can produce dif ferent results from  the sam e 
initial inputs or similar results from differing inputs. 
Focusing on the deviation-counteracting aspects of a system's mutual causal process 
discloses negative feedback, through which a system maintains morphostasis, or steady state. 
 
 
22
 

Still, although a system's overall configuration (including its code) must remain "stable," it is 
not static. In the fluctuating context of a changing environm ent, a system 's code m ust 
determine how it uses or "interprets" its  input, and through the deviation-am plifying 
messages of positive feedback, morphogenesis may emerge. Triggered by perturbations of a 
persistent mismatch in the mutual causal relationship between a changing environment and a 
system's overall configuration, a system  m ay transform itself. Thus, a system  has the 
capacity to maintain cybernetic stability precisely by altering its code and reorganizing its 
overall operation into a more complex order of configuration and performance.  
Here, I should also underscore the fact that in cybernetic explanation the ongoing 
relationship between a system and its environment is discerned as essentially nonsubstantial, 
communicational, and stochastic.59 Cybernetic systems aim at sustaining a viable steady state 
of interaction within changing contexts through the stochastic process of trial and error. Bear 
in mind that such a system  must respond to the effects of its own output, as well as other 
alterations in its environm ent. This process includes exchanges of ener gy, and generally, 
exchanges of m atter as well. S till, it is exch anges of inform ation, messages of ef fective 
control, which restrain and govern systems. Thus, the processes that together comprise the 
pattern of events discernable in whole syst ems, and within the continuing relationship 
between a system and its environment, exhibit regularities that are not primarily subject to 
the physical laws of ener gy transfer and the second law of therm odynamics. Rather, they 
proceed according to regularities discovered in the transformation of perceived events into 
symbolic information. This is the realm of existence, the universe of discourse, that Bateson 
referred to as "the Berkeleyan world of communication." 
Negative feedback m essages communicate information which allow a system  to 
delimit or restrain its array of available responses, and thus m aintain the system's steady 
state. Positive feedback messages communicate information which may trigger emergent 
(e.g., delimited by previously successful patterns) morphogenesis. A living system does not 
initially contain coded within it all the information required for it to evolve into what it has 
or will become. However, morphogenesis can "employ" the deviation-amplifying processes 
of positive feedback to produce variations of previously encoded inform ation. As a 
 
 
23
 

consequence, the process of m orphogenesis can generate m essages that determ ine the 
innovative "direction" in which a system's overall pattern of operation will change. Through 
such stochastic exchanges of signals or messages, restraints and transform ations, a 
cybernetic system maintains and evolves its pattern of  organization in mutual interaction 
with its environment. 
 
Systemic Invariance and Isomorphisms: 
Whole Systems and the Hierarchy of the Observable Cosmos 
As we have seen, Norbert Wiener proposed Cybernetics as a general study of control 
and communication theory in both the machine and the animal. As such, cybernetics became 
a master concept which assimilated a number of analytic methods, including computerization 
and sim ulation, set theory , graph theory , net theory , autom ata theory, decision theory , 
queuing theory , gam e theory , and general sy stems theory , as well. Indeed, with the 
introduction of the cybernetic paradigm , systems theory was m ore readily accepted and 
applied to num erous fields of research. Hence, as is apparent in the wealth of  available 
literature, cybernetic processes became discernible to many theorists, not only in biological 
systems, but also in the sub-organic and supra-organic world—from  microphysics to organic 
life, through social groups, to the biosphere of our planet, and beyond. 
In short, the introduction of cybernetic principles led to the identification of systemic 
invariance or isomorphisms throughout the observable cosm os. S till, whether or not 
employment of the cybernetic paradigm has been appropriate in each instance remains an 
area of dispute. Nevertheless, once perceive d, the recognition of such isom orphisms has 
fostered a valuable epistemic shift: from consideration of "entities," to the discernment of 
whole systems. The recognition of systemic isomorphisms also initiated further disclosure of 
the logic evident in the behavior and interaction of systems, enabling theorists to frame the 
formal characteristics inherent in whole (cybernetic) systems. 
The properties of such a system are identified as four-fold, three of which have been 
discussed in detail: 
 
 
24
 

  1. The system is a holistic/non-summative whole that cannot be reduced to its parts without 
altering its pattern. Artificially composed aggregates, wherein the constituent elements can 
be added or subtracted without altering the overall system are not included.  
  2. The system is self-regulating, e.g., hom eostatic, stabilizing itself through negative 
feedback. If input matches a system's coded requirements, the system maintains its output in 
order to maintain its match. 
  3. The system is self-organizing. If mismatch between input and internal code persists, the 
system searches for, and encodes a new pattern with which to operate. Thus, in the passage 
of time, differentiation and com plexification of the overall system  may emerge through 
positive feedback. 
  4. Moreover, the system  is understood as a dif ferentiated sub-whole within a systemic 
hierarchy. The "environment" in which a system  exists is also a whole system , a m etasystem. Whether ecosystem , anim al, or gan or cell, system s consist of  subsystem s that 
operate within a hierarchy of progressively inclusive m eta-systems. As a subsystem , the 
system's characteristics and operations are co-determinative components of the larger system 
within which it is an integral component. Thus, a system may be understood as Janus-faced. 
As a whole, it faces inward, i.e., the system is concerned with maintaining its internal steady 
state; as a sub-whole, the system  faces out ward, responding to its environm ent (a m etasystem) in a potentially infinite regression of relevant contexts.  
Spurred by the enthusiasm with which cybernetics was received, systems research 
has been applied to m any fields of scientific enquiry . Such research supports the 
evolutionary view that over time, through self-organization and mutual adaptation, systems 
tend to form structural hierarchies, i.e., they fashion progressively lar ger, more inclusive 
systems out of preexisting sub-systems or microhierarchies. Notably, such research has also 
revealed that this phenomenon is delimited by hierarchical restraints of a morphic nature.60 
In the patterns they exhibit, these new sy stems generate unique qualities, including m ore 
complex organization and inherently novel forms of operation. 
The view which subsequently em erged, discerns a com plementary relationship 
between the morphic nature of systemic integration and systemic differentiation within a 
 
 
25
 

hierarchical universe. Systemic differentiation and integration are conventionally understood 
as delimited by the channeling of energy, matter and information to maintain and generate 
form. Also, through the cybernetic interaction of their patterns of operation, systems tend to 
complexify and form hierarchies. Hence, in the realm of astronomy, hierarchical restraints 
are understood as gravitational; in the hierarc hy from microphysics to organic life, these 
cybernetic restraints are understood as electrochemical forces; and in social and cognitive 
hierarchies, such constraints are understood as operating in the communication of symbols.61  
Bateson rejected the use of energy and matter in this context—except in those 
instances where they act as information and thus have communicational value. As is well 
known, Bateson's work aimed at clearly drawing the distinction between energy and matter, 
on the one hand, and information, on the other, by pointing out that information represents a 
difference, and unlike ener gy or m atter, difference is a non-substantial phenom enon that 
cannot be located in space or tim e. Hence, he  m aintained that cybernetic m odels and 
metaphors are most appropriately applied to the mental realm of cognitive systems, i.e., mind 
systems—both artificial and natural. Given the unique status of information and communication, as nonsubstantial phenom ena which nevertheless govern and control cybernetic 
systems, he maintained that cybernetic systems best exemplify mental process.  
In this context the use of  energy and matter as explanatory principles is clearly 
inappropriate—except in those instances where they function as information and thus have 
communicational value. Recall that in cybernetics, zero has a "causal" value because zero 
represents a difference, it is different from one, and zero (quite literally, no thing) may thus 
be used to explain a response in this realm of mental process. As a consequence, the holistic 
systems under discussion cannot be effectively measured or studied in quantitative terms. 
Quantifiable concepts such as power, gravity, and energy, etc. are applicable only in what 
Bateson ref erred to as the Pleromic realms of explanation, i.e., the physical sciences. 62 
Atoms, molecules and stones do not respond to information. They do not scan their behavior 
for its result, nor do they m odify f uture behavior on the success or failure of such 
information. Thus, in contrast to Laszlo a nd others, Bateson rejects the application of 
 
 
26
 

cybernetic principles in describing and explaining atomic, subatomic and electrochemical 
realms of physical existence.  
In Bateson's cybernetic epistemology, mental process emerges out of certain types of 
organization of matter, and the mental properties of the system are understood as immanent, 
not in any one part, but within the system as a whole . Mental process ( e.g., m ind) is 
understood as immanent in the ci rcuits of the brain which are complete within the brain; 
mental processes are sim ilarly im manent in the cir cuits which are com plete within the 
system, brain-plus-body; and m ind is im manent in the lar ger system —person- plusenvironment.63 The resulting image requires that we eliminate the commonly held notion that 
mind is to be identified as residing only w ithin the boundary of our physical body , and is 
somehow radically separate from others.  
. . . there is no requirement of a clear boundary, like a surrounding envelope 
of skin or m embrane, and you can rec ognize that this definition [of m ind] 
includes only some of the characteristics of what we call "life." As a result it 
applies to a much wider range of those complex phenomena called "systems," 
including systems consisting of multiple organisms or systems in which some 
of the parts are living and some are not, or even to systems in which there are 
no living parts.64 
 
To be sure, mental process requires collateral energy. However, the interactions of 
mental process are triggered by difference, and "difference is not energy and usually contains 
no energy."65 Mental process requires some amount of energy (apparently very little), but as 
a stim ulus the nonsubstantial phenom enon of difference does not provide ener gy. The 
respondent mind system has collateral energy, usually provided by metabolism. If we kick a 
stone, it receives energy and it moves with that energy. However, if we kick a cat or a dog, 
our kick may transfer enough energy to move the animal. We may even imagine placing the 
animal into a Newtonian orbit. However, a living organism responds with energy from its 
metabolism. In the control of anim ation by inform ation, energy is already present in the 
respondent, the energy is available in advance of the "impact" of events. 
Moreover, the phenomena of coding, an integral element of feedback in cybernetic 
systems, is centrally incorporated into Bateson's epistemic model; and here we should note 
that his cybernetic epistemology assigns unequivocal limitations as to what mind systems are 
 
 
27
 

capable of knowing, largely due to this phenomena. That is, the process in which information 
is translated and encoded into a new form—for only then is information available for further 
stages of a system's performance— limits the perception of mental systems to images that are 
reminiscent of the shadows in Plato's allegory of the cave.  
The perspective which is thus added to  Bateson' s work em erges out of the 
information theory and com munication theory developed by Shannon and Weaver, and it 
effectively places his epistem ic m odel in what Bateson refers to as "the world of 
communication." This world of communication is to be understood as a realm of explanation 
wherein the only relevant entities or "realities" are messages. And for Bateson, this is the 
realm of m ind, in which relationships and m etarelationships, context, and the context of 
context—all of which are com plex aggregates of information or differences which make a 
difference—m ay be identified in a potentially infinite regress of relevant contexts. Consider 
Bateson's comparison of the Newtonian world and the world of communication: 
The dif ference between the Newtonian world and the world of 
communication is simply this: that the Newtonian world ascribes reality to 
objects and achieves its simplicity by excluding the context of the context—
indeed excluding all m etarelationships—a fortiori excluding an infinite 
regress of such relations. In contrast , the theorist of communication insists 
upon exam ining the m etarelationships while achieving its sim plicity by 
excluding all objects.66 
 
 
As previously noted, Bateson goes on to suggest that the world of communication is a 
Berkeleyan world, but the good bishop was guilty of understatement, "relevance or reality 
must be denied not only to the sound of the tree which falls unheard in the forest but also to 
the chair that I can see and on which I m ay sit." Our perception of a chair is communicationally real, but in the realm of mental process—the world of com munication—the chair on 
which we sit is only an idea, a message in which we put our trust. There are in fact no chairs 
or tables, no birds or cats,  no students or professors in the working circuitry of the m ind, 
except in the form  of "ideas." Dinge an Sich  or things-in-them selves are inaccessible to 
direct inquiry. Only ideas (difference, news of difference, images or maps) and information 
(differences which make a difference) about "things" are accessible to mind: 
 
 
28
 

Ideas (in som e very wide sense of  that word) have a cogency and reality . 
They are what we can know, and we can know nothing else. The regularities 
or laws that bind ideas together—these are the (eternal) verities. These are as 
close as we can get to ultimate truth.67 
 
Be that as it may, in each of the above examples (astronomy, microphysics, organic 
life, and social and cognitive hierarchies), th e hierarchical constraints are of  a m orphic 
nature, e.g., they deal with pattern, not substance. Each step between the hierarchies may be 
recognized as an advance the developm ent of form  toward increasingly com plex 
organization. Furtherm ore, as cybernetic/sys tems proponents point out, in asserting the 
irreducibility of levels, the hierarchical view of cybernetic theory conflicts with traditional 
monism, as well as with dualism and pluralism.68 Since hierarchical constraints produce both 
novelty and organization, causal or generative relations necessarily exist between the levels.  
Hence, the cybernetic view of  observed reality is hierarchical: the universe is 
understood as a hierarchy of systems, wherein each higher level of system is composed of 
systems of lower levels. Yet, as Joanna Macy  notes, this is not the hierarchy of rank and 
authority associated with organized religions or an army, nor is it the hierarchy of being and 
value found in the thought of Plato and Plotinus. 69 It is more like a set of  self-organizing 
Chinese boxes, each one neatly fashioned to fit inside the other, ad infinitum. The hierarchy 
of observed reality is thus maintained through structured interaction, with self-organization 
and mutual adaptation acting as hierarchical restraints; regulating an "osm otic" flow of 
energy, matter, and information exchanged between its differentiated levels. Or, to use the 
metaphor offered by Macy, it is more like an inverted tree, as the ancient verses of the Katha 
Upanisad im aged, where system s branch downward into subsystem s, seem ingly ad 
infinitum: 
In this tree, however , the m ovement of growth and or ganization is in the 
reverse direction. Like the shape of the inverted tree, or like pyramids, these 
natural systemic hierarchies narrow as they go up, in the sense that the higher 
levels, since they enclose the lower, are fewer in number. Yet they represent a 
vastly greater variety. While there are, for example, more atoms in the world 
than forms of plant and animal life, atoms come in only 82 kinds, whereas 
types of organic species number some million.70 
 
 
 
29
 

In this view, each level of the hierarchy cybernetically builds on more basic levels of 
organization: integrating pre-existing subsystems and micro-hierarchies into novel patterns; 
and fashioning new, more inclusive systems. As observed in embryology (e.g., epigenesis), 
evolution and child developm ent, growth and learning occur increm entally or step-wise. 
Whole system s never begin from  scratch. Their growth is inevitably based upon the 
organization of pre-or ganized com ponents. They are both delim ited and enabled by 
hierarchal constraints that perm it stability, economy, and speed in the unfolding of new 
forms of life and more inclusive hierarchical levels.71  
Since their introduction, investigation of the holistic/non-summative, self-stabilizing, 
self-organizing and hierarchical traits formally identified in cybernetic systems has spread 
into the social/behavioral sciences. Thus, the informational nature of cybernetic processes: 
including the concepts of feedback, mutual causality, and self-regulating systems— i.e., that 
cybernetic system s adapt to and alter their environm ents through sequences of selfstabilization around steady states—have been a dopted and fruitfully em ployed in these 
universes of discourse. In closing, we may note that this shift in methodology and theory is 
more than a m ere attempt to take the co mmon sense notion of com munication as having 
something basic to do with the social/behavioral sciences and give it a firm scientific status. 
Following Bateson, et al., we m ay safely assert that  cybernetics discloses a new 
paradigm of science, a paradigm that Bateson used with rigor and imagination, and which, as 
he often asserted, initiates four theoretical advancements that redefine the social/behavioral 
sciences:72 
  1. Rather than focusing on the substance a nd content of isolated phenom ena, as in the 
reductionist, mechanistic, one-way causal paradigm of classical science, cybernetics focuses 
on form, pattern and redundancy in whole systems. 
  2. The cybernetic paradigm clarifies the operational significance of inform ation and 
communication— i.e., mental process—in biological, social and behavioral phenom ena. 
   3. With its focus on communication and information, the cybernetic paradigm illuminates 
the negentropic realm of living system s. This is realm of mind in the widest sense of the 
word, and this realm  m ust be approached through its own set of preconceptions and 
 
 
30
 

premises. When we wish to describe and explain the negentropic processes evident in living 
systems, physical analogies are inadequate, and the analogies of method taken from the "hard 
sciences" are inappropriate. 
  4. The cybernetic paradigm provides a rigor ous model of m ental process with a unified 
vocabulary and a unified methodology which serve as an effective counterbalance to the charge of 
subjectivism aimed at the methodologies used in the social/behavioral sciences, as well as the 
currently fashionable assortment of "vicious criticisms" aimed at all forms of linguistic discourse.73  
These four points suggest the problem solving values claimed for cybernetics by its 
proponents in the social/behavioral sciences. Although not without reservations concerning 
uncritical applications of the cybernetic para digm, I believe the characteristics f ormally 
identified in cybernetic system s offer profoundly significant advances for studies in the 
human sciences, including my own field of specialization, religious studies and interreligious 
dialogue. Consequently, in continuing the line of  inquiry presented in this essay , I have 
written an essay that further details the problem-solving values claimed for cybernetics by its 
advocates in the social/behavioral sciences. Inasm uch as the utilization of  cybernetics 
principles in these realms of discourse has not gone without its critics, this companion piece 
focuses on the m ajor criticisms leveled at em ploying cybernetics in the social/behavioral 
sciences, while exploring the manner in which insights from the work of Gregory Bateson 
confront and resolve these often valid criticisms. 
 
 
31
 

Notes  
                                                 
     1Gregory Bateson, "From  Versailles to Cybernetics," in Steps to an Ecology of Mind: 
Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (San Francisco: 
Chandler Publishing Company, 1972), pp. 482-83. (hereafter — STEPS)  
 
     2Warren S. McCulloch, Embodiments of Mind (Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 
1965). McCulloch was a key member of the group that did the original work in cybernetics. 
He is referred to by Bateson more often than any other modern scientist.  
     3In this context, Bateson was notably influenced by a paper that McCulloch coauthored. 
See, J. Y. Lettvin, W. S. McCulloch, H. R. Maturana, and W. H. Pitts, "What the Frog's Eye 
Tells the Frog's Brain," Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 47 (1959): 1940-52; 
reprinted in Warren S. McCulloch, Embodiments of Mind, Chapter 14, pp. 230-255. 
     4Gregory Bateson, "This Norm ative Natural Hi story Called Epistem ology," reprint of 
Bateson's, "Afterword," in About Bateson, edited, with a new title taken from the body of the 
text; reprinted in Sacred Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: Epistemology 
and Ecology, pp. 215-224, edited by Rodney E. Donaldson; see, p. 216. 
 
     5Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communication 
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949; 6t h ed., Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1964), p. 1, n 1. (hereafter — Shannon & Weaver) 
     6Ludwig von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory (New York: George Braziller, 1968), p. 
xxi. 
 
     7Ervin Laszlo, Systems View of the World (New York: George Braziller, 1972), pp. 5, 6. 
     8Joanna Rogers Macy, "Interdependence:" (Ph.D. dissertation, Syracuse University, 1978), p. 
58. 
     9Lester R. Brown, et al., State of the World 1989: A Worldwatch Institute Report on 
Progress Toward a Sustainable Society (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1989). 
     10Shannon & Weaver, pp. 12-28; also, Spyros Makridakis, "The Second Law of Systems," 
International Journal of General Systems, 4 (September 1977): 2-4. (hereafter — IJGS)  
     11Ervin Laszlo, Systems View of the World, p. 4. 
 
     12Von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory, p. 12. 
     13Gordon Allport, "The Open System  in Personality Theory," in Modern Systems 
Research for the Behavioral Scientist, pp. 343-350, edited by Walter F. Buckley (Chicago: 
Aldine Publishing Co., 1968), p. 344. 
     14Von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory, p. 40. 
 
 
32
 

                                                                                                                                                 
     15Ludwig von Bertalanf fy, Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory (Barre, 
Massachusetts: Clark University Press, 1968), pp. 44-47. 
     16Von Bertalanffy, Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory, pp. 46-48. 
 
     17Kenneth Sayre has remarked that, "the universe cannot coherently be conceived as a 
closed system, since there is no coherent con cept of what it could be closed to." Kenneth 
Sayre, Cybernetics and the Philosophy of Mind (Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey: Humanities 
Press, 1976), p. 46.  
     18David Lipset, Gregory Bateson: The Legacy of a Scientist  (Boston: Beacon Press, 
1982), pp. 142-159. 
     19"Introduction" in STEPS, p. xvi. 
 
     20William Bateson, "Gam ete and Zygote," in William Bateson, F.R.S.: Naturalist, His 
Essays and Addresses Together with a Short Account of His Life, Caroline Beatrice Bateson 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1928), p. 209. 
     21Steve P. Heim s, "Gregory Bateson and the Mathem aticians: f rom interdisciplinary 
interaction to societal functions," Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 13 (April 
1977): 141. (hereafter - JHBS) 
     22Gregory Bateson, Naven (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965, reprint of 2nd. ed., 
with "Preface to the Second Edition," and "Epilogue 1958,"), pp. 1-5. (hereafter — Naven) 
     23Steve P. Heims, "Gregory Bateson and th e Mathematicians," JHBS 13 (April 1977): 
142-44; also see, Steve P. Heims, "Encounter of Behavioral Sciences with New Machine-
Organism Analogies in the 1940s," JHBS 11 (October 1975): 368-373. 
     24E.g., see, Gregory Bateson, Mind & Natur e: A Necessary Unity  (New York: E. P . 
Dutton, 1979), p. 207. (hereafter — Mind & Nature) 
     25Steve P. Heims, "Gregory Bateson and th e Mathematicians," JHBS 13 (April 1977): 
146. 
     26Catherine Wilder-Mott and John H. Weakland, editors, Rigor & Imagination: Essays 
from the Legacy of Gregory Bateson (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1981). 
     27Mind & Nature, p. 106. 
     28Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics—or Contr ol and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948), p. 11. This work's introduction details 
the major contributors and developm ents which led to the f ormation of cybernetics as a 
single field of research. 
     29"Historically, the word [cybernetics] had three diverse sets of reference: to automated 
 
 
33
 

                                                                                                                                                 
control mechanisms, to men controlling vehicles such as ships, and to political control in 
Society. Writing in 1948, as if he was wide ning the im plication of the word, Wiener 
attributed his use of the term solely to the Greek, κυ_ερvήτης for 'steersman.' Yet in Plato, 
this word was already used to refer both to na utical and to social control." David Lipset, 
Gregory Bateson: Legacy of a Scientist, p. 180. 
     30Ibid., pp. 179-181; Cf., Steve P. Heims, "Gregory Bateson and the Mathem aticians," 
JHBS 13 (April 1977): 141-42; The conferences continued through 1953, and except for the 
second conference, entitled "Teleological Mechanisms and Circular Causal Systems," they 
all retained the original nam e. The first conference dealt with a vari ety of concepts that 
originated in mathematics and engineering, with John von Neum ann and Norbert Wiener 
leading discussions on: servom echanisms, analogical and digital coding, negative and 
positive feedback, the measurement of information and its relation to the idea of  entropy, 
binary systems, von Neumann's theory of games, Bertrand Russell's theory of logical types, 
"pathological" oscillations (yes-no-yes-no-yes, etc.) in a computer confronted by Russellian 
paradox, and the concept that com munication systems depend upon information and not 
energy. Bateson unequivocally stated that membership in these conferences was "one of the 
great events of m y life." See, John Brockm an, et al. , About Bateson , edited by John 
Brockman (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1977), pp. 9-10. (hereafter — About Bateson) 
     31Steve P. Heims, "Gregory Bateson and th e Mathematicians," JHBS 13 (April 1977): 
142-143; also see, Arturo Rosenblueth, Norber t Wiener and Julian Bigelow , "Behavior, 
Purpose and Teleology," Philosophy of Science 10 (January 1943): 18-24. 
 
     32Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, p. 50. 
     33Norbert W iener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society  
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Riverside Press, 1950), pp. 8-9. 
     34Ibid., p. 69. 
     35Von Bertalanffy, Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory, pp. 40-41. 
     36William Ross Ashby, Design For A Brain (New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1952), 
pp. 36-52. 
     37Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, p. 15. 
     38Shannon & Weaver, pp. 1-12; regarding the close relationship between Shannon's work 
and Norbert Wiener, see p. 1, n 1. 
     39Gregory Bateson, "Minim al Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia," A.M.A. 
Archives of General Psychiatry 2 (May 1960): 477-491; reprinted in STEPS, Part III: Form 
and Pathology in Relationship, pp. 244-270; see, p. 250. 
     40Note how a rigorous use of these terms conflicts with common parlance, where negative 
feedback signifies criticism and positive feedback denotes encouragement. 
 
 
34
 

                                                                                                                                                 
     41"Linear and lineal. Linear is a technical term in mathematics describing a relationship 
between variables such that when they are plotted against each other on orthogonal Cartesian 
coordinates, the result will be a straight line. Lineal describes a relation among a series of causes 
or arguments such that the sequence does not come back to the starting point. The opposite of 
linear is nonlinear. The opposite of lineal is recursive." See, "Glossary," in Mind & Nature, p. 
228. 
     42Gregory Bateson, "Cybernetic Explanation," American Behavioral Scientist 10 (April 
1967): 29-32; reprinted in STEPS, Part V: Epistemology and Ecology, pp. 405-416; see, pp. 
409-10. 
 
     43"Epilogue 1958," in Naven, p. 288. 
     44Magoroh Maruyama, "Mutual Causality in General System s," in Positive Feedback, 
edited by John H. Milsum (London: Pergamon Press, 1968), pp. 80-81. 
     45Evident in the title of the Macy conferences on Cybernetics, e.g., ". . . in Biological and 
Social Systems." 
     46Ernest Kramer, "Man's Behavior Patterns," in Positive Feedback, pp. 139-148, edited by 
John H. Milsum (London: Pergamon Press, 1968), p. 140. 
     47Von Bertalanffy, Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory, pp. 42-43. 
     48John H. Milsum , ed., Preface to Positive Feedback, p. viii. Milsum 's preface to this 
volume notes that: (a) "sem antic and conceptual problem s have arisen between control 
specialists and lif e scientists over use of  the term  feedback for living system s," (b) that 
"Magoroh Maruyam a advocates the term  mutual causality  as m ore appropriate than 
purposeful for positive and negative f eedback processes in living system s," and (c) "the 
synthesis attempted in this volum e should help clear up confusion on this m atter." Also 
consider Ernest Kram er's remarks in the sa me work, p. 140, "It is only recently that the 
feedback principle has been isolated in mechanics and extensively made use of: in organisms 
the corresponding principle has long been recognized; it is only the term which is new. And 
being new, its exact usage is not stabilized." 
     49Clarification of the concept "information" is one of Bateson's major contributions to this 
field of enquiry . Drawing an unobstructed distinction between m atter, ener gy, and 
information is a key element of Bateson's epistemology, and thus, his vision of a sacred unity 
of the biosphere. 
     50William Ross Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics  (New York: Chapman & Hall, 
1956; Science Editions, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1963), pp. v-vii, indicates that 
early cybernetic theory provided for adaptive behavior, differentiation and growth; also, A. 
Rosenblueth; N. Wiener; and J. Bigelow, "Behavior, Purpose and Teleology." Philosophy of 
Science 10 (January 1943): 22-23, clearly acknowledge the distinctions between animal and 
machine. 
 
 
35
 

 
 
36
 
                                                                                                                                                 
     51Ludwig von Bertalanffy, "General Systems Theory—A Critical Review," in Modern 
Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist , pp. 11-30, edited by Walter F. Buckley, 
(Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1968), p. 22. 
     52Ibid., p. 17. Consider the example of hom eothermy, the maintenance of body 
temperature in the homeostasis of warm-blooded animals. Contrary to the rules of physical 
chemistry, where a decrease in temperature leads to a slower rate of chemical reaction, body 
cooling stimulates thermogenic centers in the brain which "turn on" the heat-producing 
mechanisms of the body. Cold is offset by an increased metabolic rate. Similarly, in the 
thermostat, a relationship between a minimum of three variables—the temperature readings, 
the control center, and the furnace switch—maintai ns a systemic balance; the lower the heat 
in the house, the more the fuel is used. In both cases, mutually affecting variables work to 
counteract or balance each other.  
     53Gregory Bateson, "Cybernetic Explanation," American Behavioral Scientist 10 (April 1967): 
29-32; reprinted in STEPS, Part V: Epistemology and Ecology, pp. 405-416; see, pp. 410-411. 
Bateson observes that, "For purposes of cybernetic explanation, when a machine is observed to be 
(improbably) moving at a constant rate, even under varying load, we shall look for restraints—e.g., 
for a circuit which will be activated by changes in rate and which, when activated, will operate 
upon some variable (e.g., the fuel supply) in such a way as to diminish the change in rate." 
 
     54Magoroh Maruyama, "The Second Cybernetic s: deviation-amplifying mutual causal 
process," American Scientist  51 (June 1963): 164-79; also see, Magoroh Maruyama, 
"Morphogenesis and morphostasis," Methodos 12-48 (1960): 251-96. 
     55Spyros Makridakis, "The Second Law of Systems," IJGS 4 (September 1977): 3, 
"Organization starts whenever a lasting deviation from uniformity (thermodynamic 
equilibrium) develops." Makridakis generali zes this principle as the "Second Law of 
Systems," which he submits as an antithetical complement to the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, the employment of which is restricted to closed systems. His "First Law of 
Systems" is that the relation between organization and energy is non-linear; more complex 
systems do not require more energy to self-organize and often much less. 
     56Ervin Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy (New York: Harper Torchbook, 1973), 
p. 269. 
     57Ibid., p. 25. 
     58Magoroh Maruyama, "The Second Cybernetic s: deviation-amplifying mutual causal 
process," American Scientist 51 (June 1963): 167. 
     59"Stochastic. (Greek stochazein, to shoot with a bow at a target; that is to scatter events 
in a partially random manner, some of which achieve a preferred outcome) If a sequence of 
events combines a random component with a selective process so that only certain outcomes 
of the random are allowed to endure, that sequence is said to be stochastic." See, "Glossary," 
in Mind and Nature, p. 230. 

 
 
37
 
                                                                                                                                                 
     60Lancelot L. Whyte, "The Structural Hierarchy in Organisms," in Unity in Diversity: A 
Festschrift for Ludwig von Bertalanffy, pp. 271-285; V ol. 1 of 2 vols, edited by William Gray 
and Nicholas D. Rizzo (New York: Gordon and Breach, 1973), p. 275. 
     61Ervin Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, pp. 57-117; also, pp. 177-180. 
     62See, Mind and Nature, pp. 91-94. 
     63Ibid., p. 317. 
     64Gregory Bateson and Mary Catherine Bateson, Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology 
of the Sacred (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1987); posthumously reconstructed and 
edited by Bateson's daughter, Mary Catherine Bateson, see p. 19. (hereafter — Angels Fear) 
 
     65Mind & Nature, p. 100. Qualifying the word triggered, Bateson notes that, "Firearms are 
a somewhat inappropriate metaphor because in most simple [nonrepeating] firearms there is 
only a lineal sequence of energetic dependencies.  . . In biological systems, the end of the 
lineal sequence sets up conditions for a future repetition," p. 101n. 
 
     66"Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia," in STEPS, p. 250. 
     67Mind & Nature, p. 191. 
     68Ibid., p. 175. 
     69Joanna Rogers Macy, "Interdependence:" (Ph.D. dissertation, Syracuse University, 1978),  
p. 69. 
     70Katha Upanisad II, iii.1., quoted in Joanna Rogers  Macy, "Interdependence:" (Ph.D. 
dissertation, Syracuse University, 1978), p. 69-70. In n 2, Macy observes that, "these 
systemic pyramids or tree-forms narrow as they ascend only by virtue of the fact that lower 
or previous levels channel into them—in th at sense they are like a company's table of 
organization. On the other hand, if we take as our measure the variety they display, they 
widen. This calls to mind the two reversed and intersecting gyres which W. B. Yeats beheld 
in his vision (1937)." 
     71Herbert A. Simon, "The Organization of Complex Systems," in Hierarchy Theory, 
edited by Howard Pattee (New York: George Braziller, 1973), p. 7. 
     72Gregory Bateson, "Epilogue: The Growth of Paradigms for Psychiatry," in 
Communication and Social Interaction: Clinical and Therapeutic Aspects of Human 
Behavior, pp. 331-337, edited by Peter F. Ostwald (New York: Grune & Stratton, 1977), pp. 
336-37. 
 
     73Richard J. Bernstein, Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: Science, Hermeneutics, and 
Praxis (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983), p. 16.  

 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Allport, Gordon. "The Open System in Personality Theory." In Modern Systems Research 
for the Behavioral Scientist , pp. 343-350. Edited by Walter F. Buckley. Chicago: 
Aldine Publishing Co., 1968. 
 
Ashby, William Ross. An Introduction to Cybernetics. New York: Chapman & Hall, 1956; 
Science Editions, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1963. 
  
------. Design for a Brain. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1952. 
 
Bateson, Caroline Beatrice. William Bateson, F .R.S.: Naturalist, His Essays and Addresses 
Together with a Short Account of His Life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1928.  
 
Bateson, Gregory. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979.  
------. Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, 
and Epistemology. San Francisco: Chandler Publishing Company, 1972.  
 
------. Naven. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1936; 2nd. ed., with "Preface to the 
Second Edition," and "Epilogue 1958," Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1958; 
reprint ed., Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965.  
 
------. A Sacred Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind . Edited by Rodney E. 
Donaldson. San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1991. 
  
------. "Afterword." In About Bateson, pp. 235-247. Edited by John Brockman. New York: E. 
P. Dutton, 1977.  
 
------. "This Normative Natural History Called Epistemology." Reprint of "Afterword," in 
About Bateson; edited, with a new title taken from the body of the text. In, A Sacred 
Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: Epistemology and Ecology, pp. 
215-224. 
  
  ------. "Epilogue: The Growth of Paradigms for Psychiatry." In Communication and Social 
Interaction: Clinical and Therapeutic Aspects of Human Behavior , pp. 331-337. 
Edited by Peter F. Ostwald. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1977.  
 
------. "Cybernetic Explanation." American Behavioral Scientist  10 (April 1967): 29-32; 
reprinted in Steps to an Ecology of Mind , Part V: Epistemology and Ecology, pp. 
405-416. 
  
------. "Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia." A.M.A. Archives of General 
Psychiatry 2 (May 1960): 477-491; reprinted in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: 
Form and Pathology in Relationship, pp. 244-270. 
 
Bateson, Gregory, and Bateson, Mary Catherine. Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of 
the Sacred. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1987. 
  

Bateson, William. "Gamete and Zygote," in William Bateson, F .R.S.: Naturalist, His Essays 
and Addresses Together with a Short Account of His Life. Bateson, Caroline Beatrice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1928; cited in, Lipset, David. Gregory 
Bateson: Legacy of a Scientist, p. 75. 
 
Bernstein, Richard J. Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: Science, Hermeneutics, and 
Praxis. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983. 
 
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von. General Systems Theory. New York: George Braziller, 1968.  
 
------. Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory. Barre, Massachusetts: Clark University 
Press, 1968.  
 
------. "General Systems Theory—A Critical Review." In Modern Systems Research for the 
Behavioral Scientist , pp. 11-30. Edited by Walter F. Buckley. Chicago: Aldine 
Publishing Co., 1968.  
 
Brockman, John, ed.; Bateson, M. C.; Birdwhistell, R. L.; Lipset, D.; May, R.; Mead, M.; 
and Schlossberg, E. About Bateson. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1977. "Afterword" by 
Gregory Bateson.  
 
Brown, Lester R.; Durning, A.; Flavin, C.; Heise, L.; Jacobson, J.; Postel, S.; Renner, M.; 
Pollock Shea, C.; and Starke, L. State of the World 1989: A Worldwatch Institute Report 
on Progress Toward a Sustainable Society. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1989.  
 
Buckley, Walter Frederick. Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist. Chicago: 
Aldine Publishing Co., 1968.  
 
Heims, Steve P. "Gregory Bateson and the Mathematicians: from Interdisciplinary 
Interaction to Societal Functions." Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 
13 (April 1977): 141-159.  
 
------. "Encounter of Behavioral Sciences with New Machine-Organism Analogies in the 
1940s." Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 11 (October 1975): 368-
373.  
 
Kramer, Ernest. "Man's Behavior Patterns." In Positive Feedback, pp. 139-48. Edited by 
John H. Milsum. London: Pergamon Press, 1968. 
  
Laszlo, Ervin. Introduction to Systems Philosophy. New York: Harper Torchbook, 1973. 
 
------. Systems View of the World. New York: George Braziller, 1972.  
 
Lettvin, J. Y .; McCulloch, W. S.; Maturana, H. R.; and Pitts, W. H.; co-authors. "What the 
Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain." Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 47 
(1959): 1940-1952; reprinted in McCulloch, Warren S. Embodiments of Mind , 
Chapter 14, pp. 230-255. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1965. 
 
Lipset, David. Gregory Bateson: The Legacy of a Scientist. Boston: Beacon Press, 1982.  

Macy, Joanna Rogers. "Interdependence: Mutual Causality in Early Buddhist Teachings and 
General Systems Theory." Ph.D. dissertation, Syracuse University, 1978. 
  
Makridakis, Spyros. "The Second Law of Systems." International Journal of General 
Systems 4 (September 1977): 1-12.  
 
Maruyama, Magoroh. "Morphogenesis and Morphostasis." Methodos 12-48 (1960): 251-
296.  
 
------. "Mutual Causality in General Systems." In Positive Feedback, pp. 80-100. Edited by 
John H. Milsum. London: Pergamon Press, 1968.  
 
------. "The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-amplifying Mutual Causal Process." American 
Scientist 51 (June 1963): 164-179.  
 
McCulloch, Warren S. Embodiments of Mind . Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 
1965. 
 
Milsum, John H., ed. Positive Feedback. London Pergamon Press, 1968.  
 
Rosenblueth, Arturo; Wiener, Norbert; and Bigelow, Julian. "Behavior, Purpose and 
Teleology." Philosophy of Science 10 (January 1943): 18-24.  
 
Sayre, Kenneth M. Cybernetics and the Philosophy of Mind . Atlantic Highlands, New 
Jersey: Humanities Press, 1976.  
 
Shannon, Claude E. and, Weaver, Warren. The Mathematical Theory of Communication . 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949;  6th. ed., Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 1964.  
 
Simon, Herbert A. "The Organization of Complex Systems." In Hierarchy Theory, pp. 1-28. 
Edited by Howard Pattee. New York: George Braziller, 1973.  
 
Whyte, Lancelot L. "The Structur al Hierarchy in Organisms." In Unity in Diversity: A 
Festschrift for Ludwig Von Bertalanffy , pp. 271-285; V ol. 1 of 2 vols. Edited by 
William Gray and, Nicholas D. Rizzo. New York: Gordon and Breach, 1973.  
 
Wiener, Norbert. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Riverside Press, 1950.  
 
------. Cybernetics—or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine . New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948.  
 
Wilder-Mott, Catherine and, Weakland, John H., editors. Rigor & Imagination: Essays from 
the Legacy of Gregory Bateson. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1981.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gregory Bateson’s Theory of Mind: 
 Practical Applications to Pedagogy 
 
 by 
 Lawrence S. Bale 
November 1992 
 
 
 
Gregory Bateson was one of the first scholars to appreciate that the patterns of organization 
and relational symmetry evident in all living systems are indicative of mind. We should not forget 
that due to the nineteenth century polem ic between science and religion, any consideration of 
purpose and plan, e.g., mental process, had been a priori excluded from science as non-empirical, or 
immeasurable. Any reference to mind as an explanatory or causal principle had been banned from 
biology. Even in the social and behavioral sciences, references to mind remained suspect. Building 
on the work of Norbert Wiener and Warren McCulloch,1 Bateson realized that it is precisely mental 
process or mind which must be investigated. Thus, he formulated the cybernetic epistemology and 
the criteria of mind that are pivotal elements in his “ecological philosophy.” In fact, he referred to 
cybernetics as an epistemology: e.g., the model, itself, is a means of knowing what sort of world this 
is, and also the limitations that exist concerning our ability to know something (or perhaps nothing) 
of such matters. As his work progresse d, Bateson proposed that we consider Epistemology as an 
overarching discipline of the natural sciences, including the social and behavioral sciences: a metascience whose parameters extend to include the science of mind in the widest sense of the word. 
Ideally, teaching should entail an unending search for theoretical and methodological perspectives 
that inspire and challenge teacher and students alike. In that spirit, this essay presents an overview of the 
cybernetic principles that influenced so much of Bateson’s work, and discusses his understanding of 
the concepts information and communication, which are pivotal elem ents of his “cybernetic 
epistemology” and his theory of m ind. The essay concludes with a brief rendering of Bateson’ s 
“learning theory,” and since the essay reflects the highly abstract and formal tone of Bateson’s work, 
at various junctures along the way some of the practical applications that this complex material may 
have for pedagogy are indicated. 
 
 

 
 
2
The Cybernetic Paradigm: A Brief Introduction 
The term Cybernetics was coined by Norbert Wiener, at the end of World War Two, in 
reference to the, “entire field of control and communication theory, whether in the machine or in the 
animal.”2 As such, cybernetics has become a master concept which assimilated a number of analytic 
methods, including computerization and simulation, set theory, graph theory, net theory, automata 
theory, decision theory, queueing theory, game theory, and general systems theory. As is apparent in 
the wealth of available literature, cybernetic pr ocesses became discernible to many theorists, not 
only in biological systems, but also in the sub-organic and supra-organic world—from  microphysics 
to organic life, through social groups, to the biosphere of our planet, and beyond. 
The introduction of cybernetic principles led to the identification of systemic invariance or 
isomorphisms throughout the observable cosmos. Here we should note that whether or not employment of the cybernetic paradigm has been appropriate in each instance remains an area of dispute. 
Nevertheless, once perceived, the recognition of su ch patterns has f ostered a valuable epistem ic 
shift: from consideration of discrete “entities,” to the discernment of whole systems. The recognition 
of system ic patterns also initiated f urther disclo sure of  the logic evident in the behavior and 
interaction of systems, enabling theorists to frame the formal characteristics inherent in whole (e.g., 
cybernetic) systems. The properties of such a system are identified as fourfold: 
  1. The system is a holistic and cannot be reduced to its parts without altering its pattern. Artificially 
composed aggregates, wherein the constituent elements can be added or subtracted without altering 
the overall system are not included.  
  2. The system is self-regulating, stabilizing itself through negative feedback loops. Thus, cybernetic 
systems respond to information. They scan their behavior to determ ine its outcom e, and if this 
“input” or feedback communicates a m atch with the system’s “coded requirements,” the system 
maintains its output, its behavior, in order to maintain the match (i.e., it maintains a steady-state). If 
the system “learns” that its coded requirements are not being matched, it modifies its behavior on the 
basis of such information. 
  3. The system is self-organizing. If a mismatch between sensory input and “internal code” persists, 
the system searches for, and encodes a new pattern with which to operate. Thus, in the passage of 
time, dif ferentiation and com plexification of the overall system  m ay em erge through positive 
feedback. 
  4. Moreover, the system is understood as a differentiated sub-whole within a systemic hierarchy. 
The “environment” in which a system  exists is  also a whole system , a m eta-system. Whether 
 

 
 
3
ecosystem, animal, organ or cell, systems consist of subsystems that operate within a hierarchy of 
progressively inclusive meta-systems. As a subsystem, the system’s characteristics and operations 
are co-determinative components of the lar ger system within which it is an integral com ponent. 
Thus, a system may be understood as Janus-faced. As a whole, it faces inward, i.e., the system is 
concerned with m aintaining its internal steady st ate; as a sub-whole, the system  faces outward, 
responding to its environm ent (a m eta-system) in  a potentially infinite regression of relevant 
contexts.  
Spurred by the enthusiasm with which cybernetics was received, systems research has been 
applied to many fields of scientific enquiry. Such research supports the evolutionary view that over 
time, through self-organization and mutual adaptation, systems tend to form structural hierarchies, 
i.e., they fashion progressively lar ger, m ore incl usive system s out of preexisting sub-system s. 
Furthermore, in the patterns they exhibit, these new system s generate unique qualities, including 
more complex organization and inherently novel forms of operation. 
The view which has subsequently emerged discerns a complementary relationship between 
the m orphic nature of system ic integration and systemic dif ferentiation within a hierarchical 
universe. Systemic differentiation and integration are conventionally understood as delimited by the 
channeling of energy, matter and inform ation to m aintain and generate form .3 Also, through the 
cybernetic interaction of their patterns of operation, system s tend to com plexify and form  
hierarchies. Hence, in the realm of astronomy, hierarchical restraints are understood as gravitational; 
in the hierarchy from  m icrophysics to or ganic life, cybernetic restraints are understood as 
electrochemical forces; and in social and cognitive hierarchies, such constraints are understood as 
operating in the communication of symbols.4  
Notably, such research has also revealed that this phenomenon is delimited by hierarchical 
restraints of a m orphic nature.5 That is, in each of these realm s the hierarchical constraints are 
related to pattern formation, not substance or quantity. Each step between the hierarchies advances 
the development of form toward increasingly complex organization. Also, systems proponents point 
out that in asserting the irreducibility of levels, the hierarchical view of cybernetic/systems theory 
conflicts with traditional monism, as well as with dualism and pluralism.6 That is, since hierarchical 
constraints produce both novelty and organization, causal or generative relations necessarily exist 
between the levels.  
Hence, the cybernetic/system s view of  obser ved reality is hierarchical: the universe is 
understood as a hierarchy of systems, wherein each higher level of system is composed of systems of 
 

 
 
4
lower levels. In this view, each level of the hierarchy cybernetically builds on more basic levels of 
organization: integrating pre-existing subsystem s and m icro-hierarchies into novel patterns; and 
fashioning new, more inclusive systems. Therefore, as observed in embryology, evolution and child 
development, growth and learning occur increm entally or step-wise. Whole systems never begin 
from scratch. Their growth is inevitably based upon the organization of pre-organized components. 
They are both delimited and enabled by hierarchical constraints that permit stability, economy, and 
speed in the unfolding of new forms of life and more inclusive hierarchical levels.  
Since their introduction, investigation of the holistic, self-stabilizing, self-organizing and 
hierarchical traits f ormally identified in cyberne tic systems has also spread into the social and 
behavioral sciences. Thus, the informational nature of cybernetic processes: including the concepts 
of feedback, mutual causality, and self-regulating systems— i.e., that cybernetic systems adapt to and 
alter their environments through sequences of self-stabilization around steady states—have been 
adopted and fruitfully employed in these disciplines.  
Arguably, the most significant contribution of cybernetics to these disciplines stems from an 
appreciation of the informational character of the processes evident in cybernetic systems. Along 
with other vital insights, this view supports a collapse of the supposed dichotom ies between 
“subjective” and “objective” data. Consequently , through the em ployment of the cybernetic 
paradigm, phenom ena previously dism issed as  non-em pirical—including feeling, em otions, 
cognition and perception of meaning—were judged accessi ble and relevant to scientific inquiry. In 
summary, we may note that the principles underlying the cybernetic paradigm have been recognized 
as a valuable m eans of conceptualizing hum ankind, not only as a biological  entity, but also as a 
social and cognitive being.7 
Some scholars have objected to the “dehumanizing” effect of applying principles derived from 
machines to the study of human beings. Yet, the aim of employing cybernetic theories in the social and 
behavioral sciences has never been to reduce identity formation— e.g. subjective learning processes, 
unconscious symbolic processes, etc.—to the principles of system  organization. What is claimed, is 
that cybernetics provides a legitimate analogy, although not an exact one, “which explains a much 
wider variety of outcomes in terms of the significance of inform ation,” than has previously been 
available.8 As such, cybernetic principles also hold valuable insights for the field of pedagogy.  
For instance, we may assume that a classroom of students (including the instructor) rapidly 
becomes a holistic system comprised of self-stabilizing, self-organizing personalities, each of whom 
perceives the class through their own set of past experiences, and each of whom is concerned with 
 

 
 
5
maintaining an internal, or personal, balance of predefined expectations and goals. Hence, any “new 
information” that enters the holistic, and m utually causal system  of the class will be uniquely 
perceived and responded to by each personality within the class. Each personality within the class 
will receive-organize-translate information according to their own set of self-stabilizing patterns— 
patterns that have succeeded, over time, in allowing the “individual” to “fit” within the context of a 
learning environment. From this perspective teaching is a dialogical process in which the teacher’s 
primary role is one of establishing or communicating contexts wherein the students may effectively 
perceive and assimilate “new information.”  
Since every person in the classroom is a holistic, self-stabilizing, self-organizing system, but 
also a participant in a larger more inclusive system— e.g., the learning environment or class, which 
also operates as a holistic, self-stabilizing, self -organizing system—a crucial com ponent of the 
dialogical teaching process must include a recognition and enhancement of the “feedback circuitry” 
that enables the larger context of the class to operate as holistic system. As a holistic unit, the class 
develops it own history of interaction, and as anyone who has led a class will note, no one part of the 
system can ef fectively exercise unilateral contro l over the entire system . In short, the class coevolves, and every member of the class develops their own strategies for appropriately responding to 
the messages of interrelationship(s) that govern a class’ becoming. In this intricate and com plex 
process, an effective teacher must be skilled at dialogical and trans-contextual communication: i.e., 
communicating contexts wherein diverse systems (personalities) can effectively exchange information; 
recognizing and effectively responding to various manifestations of negative, positive and regenerative feedback; and, assisting students in the largely unconscious processes of learning to learn. 
 
Envisaging the Negentropic Realm of Mind: 
A Realm of Communication, Information, and Learning 
Our consideration of Bateson’s model of mind, his cybernetic epistemology, and his theory of 
learning, necessarily begins with his criteria of mind . The criteria listed below are intended to 
differentiate the phenom ena of thought from  the much simpler phenomena observed in m aterial 
events. Hence, the six criteria of m ental process are intended to provide a list, “such that if any 
aggregate of phenomena, any system, satisfies all the criteria listed, I shall unhesitatingly say that the 
aggregate is a mind and shall expect that, if I am to understand that aggregate, I shall need sorts of 
explanation different from those which would suf fice to explain the characteristics of its sm aller 
parts.”9 
 

 
 
6
 Criteria of Mind 10 
1) A mind is an aggregate of interacting parts or components. 
2) The interaction between parts of mind is triggered by difference, and difference 
is a nonsubstantial phenomenon not located in space or time; difference is related 
to negentropy and entropy rather than energy.  
3) Mental process requires collateral energy.  
4) Mental process requires circular (or more complex) chains of determination. 
5) In mental process, the effects of difference are to be regarded as transforms 
(i.e., coded versions) of events which proceeded them. The rules of such transformation must be comparatively stable (i.e., more stable than the content), but are in 
themselves subject to transformation.  
6) The description and classification of these processes of transformation disclose 
a hierarchy of logical types immanent in the phenomena. 
 
Bateson argues that using the above criteria the m ind-body dilemma is soluble. He also 
asserts that, “the phenomena which we call thought, evolution, ecology, life, learning, and the like 
occur only in systems that satisfy these criteria.”11  
From the above discussion of the cybernetic paradigm, the degree to which the informational 
nature of cybernetic process has informed Bateson’s criteria is readily apparent. One might insist that 
he has reduced mental process to the operations of  cybernetic systems. However, he consistently 
maintained that the criteria are intended to be employed as an analogous and metaphoric model of 
mind. Above all, the criteria are intended for use as a tool of abduction, e.g., comparing that which is 
shared among apparently unrelated phenomena. 
In part, the aim in this essay is to consider how the model of mind, or mental process that 
emerges from Bateson’s criteria of mind relate to the phenomena of learning. After all, it is “mind” 
that learns. Therefore, we should exam ine each of the criteria before m oving on to discuss the 
practical applications of Bateson’s theory of learning. 
1) A mind is an aggregate of interacting parts or components. The model of mind mapped 
out by Bateson’s criteria is holistic, and as with all serious holism it is premised on an interaction of 
differentiated (as opposed to separate or individual) ‘parts.’12 Holistic systems require a differentiation of parts, or there can be no dif ferentiation of events and functioning. Therefore, mind is 
understood as an aggregate of differentiated parts, which at their primary level are not themselves 
mental. These ‘parts’ in combined interaction constitute wholes, or whole mind systems. In more 
 

 
 
7
complex instances, some of the ‘parts’ of a mind system may fulfill all the necessary requirements of 
the criteria. In this case, these ‘parts’ are also recognized as minds, or subminds. In either case, mind 
or mental process is understood as immanent in, and emergent from “certain sorts of organization of 
parts.”13 
With this foundation for understanding mental process, we may now consider the nature of 
the relationships within which m ind is im manent, or out of which m ind emerges, i.e., how the 
relationships between the ‘parts’ interact to create mental process. 
2) The interaction between parts of mind is triggered by difference, and difference is related 
to negentropy and entropy rather then energy. Here, the informational nature of cybernetic process is 
first incorporated into the criteria, and we encounter a clarification of the concept “information,” as 
distinct from “energy” and “matter.” We are also introduced to the lim itations of knowing in this 
model of mind.  
Beginning with an idea as the basic unit of mental process, Bateson defines an idea as, “A 
difference or distinction or news of differences,” adding that more commonly we refer to complex 
aggregates of such units as ideas.14 Of course difference is a nonsubstantial phenomenon that cannot 
be located in space or time. The difference between an egg and an apple does not lie in the egg or in 
the apple, nor does it exist in the space between them.  
In agreement with Kant, Bateson notes that even the simplest of objects “contain” an infinite 
number of differences, but only differences which make a dif ference are used in form ing mental 
images—i deas, or aggregates of ideas. Mind responds only to the differences in its environment that 
it is able to discern. And in this process, the holistically bonded ‘parts’ that comprise mind systems 
act as a sort of filter or sieve, sorting, se lecting and collecting and subsequently decoding 
information, i.e., differences, or news of difference.15 Ideas (news of difference, images, maps) about 
things is what get into the working circuitry of mind, but mental systems know nothing of “thingsin-themselves” (Dinge an sich).16 In short, mind systems are influenced by maps, never territory. 
This suggests why Bateson feels cybernetic models and metaphors are most appropriately 
applied to the realm of mental process, i.e., mind systems. Given the importance of information and 
communication in cybernetic theory, and the unique status of information (news of difference) as a 
nonsubstantial phenomenon that nevertheless influences, governs and controls a cybernetic system, 
it ought to be evident that cybernetic models best exemplify mental process. Thus, the use of energy 
and matter as explanatory principles is clearly inappropriate—except in those instances where they 
function as information and thus have communicational value. 
 

 
 
 
8
Consider the fact that in the realm of communication and information, zero has a “causal” 
value because it represents a difference, it is different from one, and zero (quite literally, no ‘thing’) 
may thus be used to explain a response in both the realms of communication and mental process. In 
this context, quantifiable concepts such as power, gravity, and energy, etc. are applicable only in the 
so-called “hard sciences”— i.e., realms of explanation used in  exploring the physical realm of 
material events. In contrast to cybernetic systems (including our computers), atoms, molecules and 
stones do not respond to information. There is no evidence that these entities scan their behavior for 
its result, nor do they modify future behavior on the basis of such information.  
Thus, in contrast to Laszlo and others, Bate son feels we should reject the application of 
cybernetic feedback principles in describing and explaining atomic, subatomic and electrochemical 
realms of physical existence. He also believes that given the preponderance of metaphors and 
explanatory principles borrowed from the energetic s and hard sciences, we must totally re-think 
most of the theoretical basis underpinning much of the social and behavioral sciences.  
3) Mental process requires collateral energy. Although the interactions of mental process are 
triggered by difference, “difference is not energy and usually contains no energy.”17 Mental process 
requires some amount of energy (apparently very little), but as a stimulus the nonsubstantial 
phenomenon of difference does not provide energy. The res pondent mind system has collateral 
energy, usually provided by metabolism. If we kick a stone, it receives energy and it moves with that 
energy. However, if we kick a cat or a dog, our kick may transfer enough energy to move the animal, 
and we may even imagine placing the animal into a Newtonian orbit, but living organisms generally 
respond to stimuli with energy from their own metabolism. In the control of animation by 
information, energy is already present in the respondent, the energy is available in advance of the 
“impact” of events. 
4) Mental process requires circular (or more complex) chains of determination. Since the 
central themes of this holistic model are drawn from the recursive nature of cybernetic systems, there 
is a fundamental emphasis on circular causal chai ns in mental process. Here again, mind is 
understood as immanent in the combined interaction of the differentiated ‘parts’ of the system, and 
this interaction depends upon the existence of a ne twork of circular, or more complex, chains of 
determination, i.e., the parts of the system are connected and interact within a closed circuit. Since 
the system is circular (i.e., recursive), effects of events at any point in the circuit will move around or 
throughout the system, eventually producing changes at the point of origin. Thus, “a special sort of 
holism is generated by feedback and recursiveness,” in the system.18  

 
 
9
Moreover, in accordance with the regularities discovered in cybernetic systems, the closed 
circuitry—in com bination with the effects of time—generates a holis tic matrix in which no one part 
of the system can exercise unilateral control over the system as a whole. Each part is controlled by 
information moving throughout the closed circuitry of the whole system. Such systems are subject to 
the effects of time, and therefore, each part m ust adapt to the tim e characteristics of the system . 
Thus, each part m ust adapt to the ef fects of its own past action within the system .19 Hence, the 
mental properties of the system  are understood as immanent, not in any one part, but within the 
system as a whole . For exam ple, mental process ( e.g., mind) is understood as im manent in the 
circuits of the brain which are complete within the brain; mental processes are similarly immanent in 
the circuits which are complete within the system, brain-plus-body; and mind is immanent in the 
larger system — person- plus-environment.20 The resulting im age requires that we elim inate the 
commonly held notion that m ind is to be identif ied as residing only within the boundary of our 
physical body, and is somehow radically separate from others: 
. . . there is no requirement of a clear boundary, like a surrounding envelope of skin 
or membrane, and you can recognize that this definition [of m ind] includes only 
some of the characteristics of what we ca ll “life.” As a result it applies to a m uch 
wider range of those com plex phenom ena called “system s,” including system s 
consisting of multiple organisms or systems in which some of the parts are living and 
some are not, or even to systems in which there are no living parts.21 
 
The resulting image also suggests that authoritative methods of teaching are not going to be 
as effective as apprenticeship methods of instruction. Like it or not, instructors cannot effectively 
foist their will upon the mind system of a class, nor upon any “individual” student within the class. 
One may exercise authority, but unilateral control is not a valid option, and any attempt to exercise 
dominance will only succeed if the student(s) “submits.” The end result of an authoritative “lesson” 
of dominance cannot be predicted or controlled, and although the students are often unaware of the 
fact, they are in control of their personal and collective dialogical learning processes. 
We might want to pause here and consider how this inclusive image of mind suggests that the 
context of a classroom or a learning environment full of students ‘is’, or becomes, a holistic mind 
system —com prised of teacher, students, and technological extensions of mental process (books, 
computers, microscopes, etc.). Also, consider how the physical context of the classroom contains 
“context markers” (blackboards, desks, visual aids, the flag, etc.), that communicate the message(s) 
(information available only to mind systems) that this context is different from other locations, it is a 
learning environment.  
 

 
 
10
We should also note that the feedback loops which maintain the holistic nature of the larger 
more inclusive mind system identified as “a class,” represent a fundamentally dialogical process. 
Thus, each person in a learning environm ent operates as a holist m ind system in dialogue with 
themselves, while sim ultaneously participating in the (often silent) dialogue of the lar ger mind 
system that can be recognized as persons- plus-environment. Moreover, the m ental phenomena 
described here undoubtedly reflect not only primary and autonomic process, but also the complex 
interaction of social behavior. If we are going to effectively create contexts in which students can 
learn, we would do well to have  our m ethods parallel the dialogical principles that bond m ind 
systems across a broad spectrum of primary and social levels of mental process. 
5) In mental process the effects of differences are to be regarded as transforms (i.e., coded 
versions) of events which proceeded them. The phenomena of coding, an integral element of feedback in cybernetic system s, is incorporated in to the m odel through this criterion; and again, we 
should note that the model assigns unequivocal limitations as to what mind systems are capable of 
knowing, largely due to this phenomena. That is, the process in which information is translated and 
encoded into a new form —for only then is inform ation available for further stages of a system ’s 
performance—lim its the perception of mental systems to images that are reminiscent of the shadows 
in Plato’s allegory of the cave.  
The perspective added to the model by this criterion emerges out of information theory, but 
this is not a “garbage in, garbage out” use of the information processing model. After all, Bateson 
was one of the founders of the family therapy movement, and he does not suggest that our minds are 
simply an information processing apparatus. He  vehemently opposed such sim plistic and vulgar 
application of cybernetic theory . The model of mind drawn by the criteria applies to all m ental 
systems, but on a gradation of com plexity. The concept of “information in,” “information out” is 
appropriate enough for computers, and perhaps single cell animals; but clearly not for the complex 
interaction of families and classrooms, nor the personalities who—when bonded together through 
communication—form  these m ore inclusive m ind sy stems. The transform ation of inform ation 
referred to in this criterion is intended to include  influences from the sum total of a personality’s 
contextual learning experiences, e.g., a construct of biological, cultural and social habituation. 
This criterion also effectively places mental process in what Bateson refers to as “the world 
of communication,” which is a realm of explanation wherein the only relevant entities or “realities” 
are messages. This is the realm of mind, in which relationships and metarelationships, context, and 
the context of context—all of which are com plex aggregates of information or differences which 
 

 
 
11
make a difference—m ay be identified in a potentially infinite regress of relevant contexts. Consider 
Bateson’s comparison of the Newtonian world and the world of communication: 
The difference between the Newtonian wo rld and the world of com munication is 
simply this: that the Newtonian world ascribes reality to objects and achieves its 
simplicity by excluding the context of  the context—indeed excluding all 
metarelationships—a fortiori excluding an infinite regress of such relations. In 
contrast, the theorist of communication insists upon examining the metarelationships 
while achieving its simplicity by excluding all objects.22 
 
Bateson suggests that the world of communication (the realm of mental process, and learning) is a 
Berkeleyan world, but the good bishop was guilty of understatement. “Relevance or reality must be 
denied not only to the sound of the tree which falls unheard in the forest but also to the chair that I 
can see and on which I may sit.”23 Our perception of a chair is communicationally real, but in the 
realm of mental process—the world of com munication—the chair on which we sit is only an idea, a 
message in which we put our trust. There are in fact no chairs or tables, no birds or cats, no students 
or professors in the working circuitry of the mind, except in the form of “ideas.” Dinge an Sich or 
things-in-themselves are inaccessible to direct inquiry. Only ideas (difference, news of difference, 
images or maps) and information (differences which make a difference) about “things” are accessible 
to mind: 
Ideas (in some very wide sense of that word) have a cogency and reality. They are 
what we can know, and we can know nothing else. The regularities or laws that bind 
ideas together—these are the (eternal) verities. These are as close as we can get to 
ultimate truth.24 
 
At this juncture, considering the importance of “context” in learning and pedagogical theory, 
we should pause and consider what exactly context might “be”? The list of criteria we have thus far 
examined suggests that: A context is nonsubstantial phenomenon which cannot be located in space 
or time. Or perhaps we should say that a context is a constellation of differences; not a ‘thing’, but 
rather a mental image or a map—a recognition of th e differences that make a difference within a set 
of relationships. Here, it is interesting to note that the Artificial Intelligence movement (which has 
little in common with Bateson’s ideas, other than it also grew out of cybernetic theory) falters on the 
concept of context. The m ost powerful com puters cannot be program med to recognize and 
distinguish the differences that mark a given context as separate or different from any other context.  
6) The description and classification of these processes of transformation disclose a 
hierarchy of logical types immanent in the phenomena . This final criterion applies the concept of 
logical types to the mutual causal and hierarchical characteristics of the cybernetic paradigm, and 
 

 
 
12
employs the result in the model of mental process. We have previously observed that mental process 
requires circular or m ore complex, causal relations, and that the closed circuitry of whole m ind 
systems generates a holistic matrix in which the mental properties of the system are immanent within 
the working circuitry of the system  as a whole. Thus, mental process is both immanent in, and 
inseparable from the realm of physical appearances. Mind is immanent in, and emergent from certain 
sorts of organization of parts. Nevertheless, mental systems are not isolated monads. They have the 
capacity to unite with other sim ilar system s, thus f orming systemic hierar chies com prised of 
differentiated sub-minds. 
This view requires that we regard mind as an interpenetrating process that includes (or, is 
included within) other mental systems, in sequential moments of time. The mind system(s) in which 
sub-minds participate is thus discerned as a m eta-system, where perceived levels of dif ference 
separate progressively abstract and inclusive levels of logical types. The mental properties of a submind are co-determinative and mutually causal components of the larger mind system within which 
it is an integral component. Again, we find that like cybernetic systems, mind systems are Janusfaced: as a whole, the system “faces” inward, i.e., its dialogue with itself is concerned with maintaining the integrity of its internal steady state (the system’s knowing is its being); as a sub-whole, 
the system “faces” outward, responding to perceived differences in its environment, and differences 
communicated to it through pathways or networks of recursive circuitry within the lar ger mind 
system—the m eta-system of which it is a differentiated part (knowing how to appropriately fit and 
adapt preserves the system’s being). All of which occurs within a virtually infinite regress of relevant 
contexts.  
“Any object may become a part of a mental system, but the object does not then become a 
thinking subsystem in the larger mind.”25 When mental systems do unite with other similar systems, 
they become operational (i.e., “thinking”) subsystems, or differentiated sub-minds within a larger 
mind that is subsequently form ed. Mental systems are thus understood as form ing hierarchies of 
levels of difference; i.e., such difference as is evident “between a cell and tissue, between tissue and 
organ, organ and organism, and organism and society”: 
These are the hierarchies of units or Gestalten [whole mental systems], in which each 
subunit is a part of the unit of the next lar ger scope. And, always in biology , this 
difference or relationship which I call “part of “ is such that certain differences in the 
part will have informational effect upon the larger unit, and vice versa [the larger unit 
will have to have informational effect upon the subunit].26 
 
 

 
 
13
With informational effects moving between or being exchanged throughout the system, the 
non-substantial phenomenon of difference produces substantial, i.e., “real”, effects. In keeping with 
Gestalt theory, this is a uniting or combining of information that results in a new order of information or the creation of a logical product—som ething more than simple addition. An apt analogy is 
that of self-organizing Chinese boxes, each one dialogically fashioning itself to fit inside the other, 
ad infinitum. This combining of ‘parts’ results in something more on the order of multiplication or 
fractionation,27 with each level of difference in the systemic hierarchy forming a pattern of interaction that represents a difference of logical type. 
Bateson’s intent with this final criterion seems to mean that the description and classification 
of mind systems discloses a dialogical hierarchy of logical types, where each logical type—each 
level of m ental process—is distinguished by a leve l of dif ference. Each le vel of dif ference also 
represents a context where similar systems may form larger Gestalten and operate as subsystems. 
Thus, viewed through the hierarchic structure of thought and the “world of com munication” 
proposed by cybernetic theory, the hierarchies of levels of difference evident in the natural world are 
a result of informational patterns of interaction.  
Self-organization, self-stabilization and mutual adaptation (all governed by inform ational 
feedback loops) act as hierarchical restraints th at regulate som ething like an “osm otic” flow of 
information that is dialogically exchanged within and between the differentiated levels. Levels of 
knowing that we experience (for instance) as the “self;” that separation between our personal 
knowing/being and the knowing/being of the living environment—the natural world in which we 
live, sharing our interpretation of experience, learning, adapting, and growing; the world of mental 
process with which we co-evolve. 
 
Characteristics and Potentialities of a Mind System 
Below is a list of the distinctive traits and potentialities of mind systems that exhibit the six 
criteria. This includes all living organisms, as well as any component of a living system that fulfills 
all the criteria, and thus exhibits a degree of autonomy in its self-regulation and operation: for 
example, individual cells; organs; and aggregates of organs. 
The model of mind advanced in this essay is a radically inclusive paradigm: extending the 
meaning of mind well beyond its previous boundari es; and where warranted, recognizing m ental 
process in systems that do not include living components. Here we should also note that this model 
totally discredits the traditional view of arrogating mind to our species, alone. As we review these 
 

 
 
14
characteristics and potentialities of m ind systems, we should bear in m ind that the six criteria 
propose a holistic model of mind which operates as a totally integrated system. They are useful as a 
description and explanation of mental process only in combination, and we should expect any such 
mental system to exhibit the following distinctive traits or attributes:  
  1. Mind systems will exercise some degree of autonomy or self control: the recursive nature of 
feedback loops within the system’s circuitry give the system information about itself and allow the 
system to exercise self-regulation. 
  2. Mind systems will exhibit a capacity for death: either through the randomization or disassembly 
of the multiple parts of the system  or through the breaking of the circuitry that gives the system  
information about itself, thus destroying its autonomy. 
  3. Mind systems will exercise the capacity of se lf-correction: thus, we m ay recognize that they 
exercise purpose and choice. 
  4. Mind systems will adapt to their environments through sequences of self-stabilization around 
steady states: therefore they exhibit stability (steady state), extreme instability (runaway), or some 
mixture of these two. 
  5. Mind systems will learn and remember: they exercise the ability to change and adapt in response 
to internal or external differences in their environment; and they fashion some degree of ordering or 
predictability through the stochastic process of trail and error. 
  6. Mind systems will exhibit some capacity to store energy. 
  7. Mind systems will be influenced by “maps,” never “territory.” 
  8. Mind systems will be subject to the f act that all messages are of some logical type: thus, the 
possibility always exists that they will commit errors in logical typing. 
  9. The culmination of our synopsis is the principle that mind systems will have the capacity to unite 
with other similar systems, and thus create still larger wholes. 
 
The Logical Categories of Changing Mind: 
Bateson’s Theory of Learning 
While highly form al and abstract, Bateson’s criteria of mind  and the m odel of m ind he 
presents offer valuable insights for pedagogy. His model of mind is intended to be understood as a 
relational process rather than a ‘thing’ that is som ehow disassociated or separable from  another 
‘thing’ (the “body”). His insights introduce a rigorously formulated basis for what I call removing 
“ego” from the process of teaching, replacing authoritative modes of instruction with more dialogical 
modes of instruction, such as mentoring and apprenticeship. Taken seriously, his concept of mind 
 

 
 
15
insists that teaching m ust address the whol e person—physical, em otional and intellectual—in 
dialogues that cut across a wide range of contextual boundaries and communication pathways. 
One significant implication of Bateson’s holistic and dialogical notion of mind is that when 
the patterns of interaction we commonly refer to as “minds” actually do connect via communication, 
the relationship thus established triggers or releases a potential for change that may bring about a 
profound transformation of the “entities” involved, as well as the larger mental systems in which 
they are embedded. Hence, the insight that mental systems become thinking subsystems of larger 
holistic minds (more inclusive Gestalten) suggests that when genuine dialogue occurs, we enter into 
a process that holds the possibility of experiencing one another in a manner that is as integrative and 
consequential as that which is evident in the integration of a living organism.  
Equally significant implications of Bateson’s work emerge when we consider his theory of 
learning. Bateson examined the phenomenon of learning in several essays written between 1942 and 
1971. He presented his theory of learning from more than one perspective, addressed a number of 
related agendas, and fine tuned the details of his work over time. Since my aim in concluding this 
essay with an examination of Bateson’s learning theory is to help us explore the relationship between 
the phenomena involved in learning and the contexts of learning  we attem pt to established in a 
classroom, it is not be necessary to detail all the nuances of this sizable body of work. 
For Bateson, the key to understanding the lear ning process is the phenom ena of change, 
context, and the recognition of context of contexts.  “The whole m atter turns on whether the 
distinction between a class and its members is an ordering principle in the behavioral phenomena” 
which we call learning.28 
The word “learning” undoubtedly denotes change of some kind. To say what kind 
of change is a delicate matter. However, from the gross common denominator, 
“change,” we can deduce that our descriptions of “learning” will have to make the 
same sort of allowance for the varieties of logical type which has been routine in 
physical science since the days of Newton. The simplest and most familiar form 
of change is motion, and even if we work at that very simple physical level we 
must structure our descriptions in terms of “position or zero motion,” “constant 
velocity,” “acceleration,” “rate of change of acceleration,” and so on.29 
 

 
 
16
 
Bateson employs the theory of logical types to  delineate a set of five classes of learning 
labeled Learning 0 through IV , with each higher class encompassing the lower classes of learning. 
Learning IV is a special type of learning that is not readily accessible, and since this level of learning 
“probably does not occur in any adult living organism on this earth,” 30 our focus is necessarily 
limited to examining Learning 0 through III.  
Before continuing, we should note some of the difficulties posed by language. The terms 
“higher” and “lower” convey a considerable surplus meaning, with “higher” suggesting a “superior” 
value and “lower” suggesting an “inferior” value. In this discussion of learning theory we should not 
fail to recognize that the first four levels of learning are potentially available to everyone. Just as the 
class “furniture” is no better or worse than the subclasses included within it—”table” or “chair,” for 
example—Learning 0 and Learning I are also to be understood as no better or worse than Learning II 
or Learning III. All four are potentially a part of the human experience and thus equally important. It is 
precisely our awareness that this is the case which is commonly difficult to perceive and understand. 
Learning 0: Zero learning is “the simplest receipt of information from an external event in 
such a way that a similar event at a later (and appropriate) time will convey the same information: I 
‘learn’ from the factory whistle that it is twelve o’clock.”31 This type of learning represents a context 
where a person exhibits minimal change in response to an item of sensory input, be it simple or 
complex. Learning 0 lacks any stochastic process, i.e., it does not contain components of trial and 
error, and it is typified “by specificity of response , which—right or wrong—is not subject to 
correction.”32 This level of learning may be identified in phenomena that occur in various contexts, 
and here a brief list of such contexts may help illustrate the intended meaning:  
(a) In experimental settings, when “learni ng” is complete and the animal gives 
approximately 100 per cent responses to the repeated stimulus.  
(b) In cases of habituation, where the animal has ceased to give overt responses to 
what was formerly a disturbing stimulus.  
(c) In cases where the pattern of the response is minimally determined by the 
experience and maximally determined by genetic factors.  
(d) In cases where the response is now highly stereotyped. 
(e) In simple electronic circuits, where the circuit structure is not itself subject to 
change resulting from the passage of impulses within the circuit—i.e., where the causal 
links between “stimulus” and “response” are as the engineers say “soldered in.”33 
 
Although Learning 0 does not contain a component of trial and error, at this level of learning 
we are capable of at least two types of “error.” If the context offers a set of alternatives to choose 
from, one may correctly employ the information that signals these available alternatives, but choose 

 17
the wrong alternative; or , one m ay misidentify the context and thus choose from  a wrong set of 
alternatives.34 
If now we accept the overall notion that all learning (other than zero learning) is in 
some degree stochastic . . . it follows that an ordering of the process of learning can 
be built upon an hierarchic classification of  the types of error which are to be 
corrected in the various learning process. Zero learning will then be the label for the 
immediate base of all those acts (sim ple and complex) which are not subject of 
correction by trial and error. Learning I will be an appropriate label for the revision 
of choice within and unchanged set of alternatives; and Learning II will be the label 
for the revision of the set from which the choice is to be made; and so on.35 
 
Learning I: In common, nontechnical parlance this leve l of learning is generally what we 
mean by the term “learning.” It is often referred to as trial-and-error learning, instrumental learning, 
or conditioning. “These are cases where an entity gives at time two a different response from what it 
gave at tim e one.”36 This level of learning covers a br oad range of phenom ena, including rote 
learning, a rat learning which turn to make in a maze, and a person learning to play a Bach fugue. In 
essence, Learning I may be recognized when, with repeated practice, new responses occur.  
Here, it is important to note that without the assumption of repeatable contexts there can be 
no learning of this sort . . .  “we may regard ‘context’ as a collective term for all those events which 
tell the organism among what set of alternatives he must make his next choice.”37  
Without the assum ption of repeatable cont ext (and the hypothesis that for the 
organisms which we study the sequence of experience is really somehow punctuated 
in this manner), it would follow that all “learning” would be of one type: namely, all 
would be zero learning.38 
 
If all learning were zero learning, all behavior  would be genetically determ ined, and we 
would be little more than genetically programmed automatons, in which case our physical, em otional, and intellectual life would am ount to Pavl ovian responses. However , if the prem ise of 
repeatable context is correct, “the case for logical typing of the phenomena of learning necessarily 
stands, because the notion ‘context’ itself is subject to logical typing.” Either we reject the notion of 
repeatable context or we accept it, and by accepting it, we “accept the hierarchic series—stimulus, 
context of stimulus, context of context of stimulus, etc. This series can be spelled out in the form of a 
hierarchy of logical types as follows”: 
a) Stimulus is an elementary signal, internal or external. 
b) Context of stimulus is a metamessage which classifies the elementary signal.  
c) Context of context of stimulus is a meta-metamessage which classifies 
the metamessage. And so on.39  
 

 18
 
Bateson insists that the concept of repeatable context— and by extension the above hierarchic series 
of contexts—is a necessary prem ise for any theory that defines learning as change. Moreover, “this 
notion is not a mere tool of our description but contains the implicit hypothesis that . . . the sequence 
of life experience, action, etc., is somehow segmented or punctuated into subsequences or ‘contexts’ 
which may be equated or differentiated by the organism.”40 
This all raises the question as to what sort of creatures we are that we can identify a context, 
or further, that we can recognize a repeatable c ontext, or a context of contexts?  Since we m ay 
respond to the “same” stimulus differently in differing contexts, what is the source of information 
necessary for us to recognize the dif ference between Context A and Context B? To answer these 
questions, Bateson introduces the term “context markers,” and employs this term to designate the 
signals or labels with which humans and quite likely many other organisms classify or differentiate 
between two contexts. 
When we enter a classroom on the day of an exam, everyone in attendance knows that on this 
day, for the duration of the examination, their activities will differ from those of other times in the 
“same” classroom. Similarly, it is reasonable to assume that when a harness or some other apparatus 
is placed on a dog, who has had extended experience in a psychological laboratory, the smell and 
feel of the equipment, as well as the setting of the laboratory, all act as signals with which the animal 
marks that he is about to undergo a series of not unfamiliar contexts. Such sources of information 
may be referred to as “context m arkers,” and at least for humans, there must also be “markers of 
contexts of contexts.”41 
When we attend the perf ormance of a play , the playbills, the stage, the curtain, and the 
seating arrangement, etc., act as “markers of context of context.” If a character in the play commits a 
crime, we do not go out and sum mon the police, because through these “m arkers of context of 
context” we have received information about the context of the character’s context. We know we are 
watching a play. In contrast, Shakespeare uses a twist of irony in Hamlet when, precisely because 
Claudius ignores several “markers of context of context,” the King has his conscience prodded by 
the play within the play.  
In the complex social life of humans, a diverse set of events can be  identified as “context 
markers.” If I pick up my keys, for whatever reason, my wife is apt to ask where I intend to go. In 
this instance, my keys are a “context marker” that for my wife signals my intention of leaving the 
house. By way of example, Bateson offers the following list:  
 

 19
(a) The Pope’s throne from  which he m akes announcements ex cathedra, which 
announcements are thereby endowed with a special order of validity.  
(b) The placebo, by which the doctor sets the st age for a change in the patient’ s     
subjective experience,  
(c) The shining object used by some hypnotists in “inducing trance.” 
(d) The air raid siren and the “all clear.” 
(e) The boxers handshake before a fight.  
(f) The observances of etiquette.42 
The notions of repeatable context and defining “learning” as change are not foreign to the 
field of pedagogy. For centuries, instructors have tacitly recognized and fashioned context markers 
(employing visual aids, and other less obvious means), as I indicated earlier in this essay. What I find 
most valuable (most practical) in this theory of learning is the elegant clarity with which Bateson 
focuses our attention on the phenom ena of context, repeatable context, and context markers as 
somehow central to understanding and encouraging those changes we designate as “learning.”  
Learning II: The next higher level or logical type of learning entails changes in the process of 
Learning I, or learning about learning.43 Learning II is recognizable as “corrective change in the set 
of alternatives from which choice is made,” and this includes “changes in the manner in which the 
stream of action and experience is segmented or punctuated into contexts together with changes in 
the use of context markers.”44  
Simply put, Learning II represents the generally unconscious phenomena wherein we learn 
about and classify the contexts in which learning takes place. For example, when we first learn to 
play a musical instrument, it usually takes a considerable amount of time to play with few errors. 
Yet, as we continue to play and learn new pieces, the speed with which we learn to play at the same 
level of performance increases. We have learned a pattern or class of behaviors, for instance “guitar 
playing,” and we are able to progressively transfer skills acquired in learning one member of that 
class, “folk guitar,” to another, “classical guitar.” For anyone who has contemplated the processes 
involved in this type of learning (riding a bicycl e, mathematical and language skills m ay also be 
included as exam ples) it is evident that m uch of this kind of learning takes place outside of our 
awareness. 
Bateson argues that, “an essential and necessary function of all habit formation and Learning 
II is an economy of the thought processes (or neural pathways) which are used for problem-solving 
or Learning I.”45 The phenomena of learning occur within a hierarchy of perceived and classified 
contexts and meta-contexts in which our percepts are con tinually being verified or contradicted. 
 

 20
However, as with typing or riding a bicycle, Learning II affords us the advantage of not questioning 
the details of our actions. We may carry on “without thinking.”46 
Some types of knowledge can conveniently be sunk to unconscious levels, but other 
types must be kept on the surface. Broadly , we can af ford to sink those sorts of 
knowledge which continue to be true regardless of changes in the environment, but 
we must maintain in an accessible place all those controls of behavior which must be 
modified for every instance. The economics of the system, in fact, pushes organisms 
toward sinking into the unconscious those generalities of relationship which remain 
permanently true and toward keeping within the conscious the pragmatic of particular 
instances.47 
 
Learning II amounts to habit formation, e.g., it allows generalities of relationship that remain 
true to settle progressively further into the unc onscious, and we should note that this pattern of 
learning is not restricted to classif ying the contexts of acquired skills, such as operational tasks. 
Consider the premises for what is generally referred to as “character,” or definitions of “self.” In this 
instance, Learning II saves us from  having to continually re-examine the abstract, philosophical, 
aesthetic, and ethical aspects of many sequences of life. For precisely this reason, Learning II can 
create problems for anyone attempting to reconstruct the context of the classroom system.  
. . . Learning II is a way of punctuating events. But a way of punctuating is not true 
or false. . .  It is like a picture seen in an inkblot; it has neither correctness nor 
incorrectness. It is only a way of seeing the inkblot. . . 
The practitioner of magic does not unlearn his magical view of events when 
the magic does not work. In fact, the propositions which govern punctuation have the 
general characteristic of being self-validating. What we term “context” includes the 
subject’s behavior as well as the external events. But this behavior is controlled by 
former Learning II and therefore it will be of such a kind as to mold the total context 
to fit the expected punctuation.48 
 
In other words, patterns of learned behavior regarding our interrelationship with the milieu in 
which we are embedded tend to become more and more generalized and come to determine the bias 
of a person’s global expectations. Consequently , one may then anticipate that one’s existence is 
orderly and structured, or sim ply chaotic; m ostly punishing, or m ostly rewarding. These more 
general relational patterns develop early in life and quickly drop out of awareness, and since what is 
learned is a way of punctuating events, what then happens is that we tend to mold our environment 
to fit the expected punctuation.49  
The self-validating nature of this process renders it notoriously difficult to reverse because 
the personality involved is unaware, and he or she will unconsciously manipulate their perception of 
the environment to fit their expectations, and subsequently bypasses other learning opportunities. For 
 

 21
instance, overcoming the expectations of a “fit and proper” learning environment, whether from 
students, parents or administrators—expectations controlled by former Learning II, and therefore, 
largely unconscious—poses a dif ficult task for anyone attem pting to reconstruct the learning 
contexts of the classroom system. 
Still, we are called upon to “educate” our students, and a close analysis of the words we use 
to describe the patterns of relationship and definitions of “self “ commonly called “character” reveals 
that no one is dependent, liberated, or competitive, etc. in isolation— all perception and all learning 
are essentially interactional. It follows that if (as scholars such as Bateson and Klaus Krippendorff 
suggest) in the operation of our perception we are all cartographers, then our role as educators is to 
communicate contexts and meta-contexts wherein our students may construct, explore and 
reexamine some of their most fundamental reality constructs. The “context markers” we broadcast 
will signal meta-metamessages with which the students m ay choose to punctuate or classify the 
context of their lives. If we are successful in our task, the dialogical l earning environments we 
fashion can offer our students an experience “like entering the cartographer on the map he or she is 
making.”50 Like the border on a m ap, our “context m arkers” frame the inform ation within the 
dialogue, setting the stage for the emergence of self-discovery. 
In such systems, involving two or more persons, where most of the important events 
are postures, actions, or utterances of the living creatures, we note immediately that 
the stream of events is com monly punctuated into contexts of learning by a tacit 
agreement between the persons regarding the nature of their relationship—or by 
context markers and tacit agreem ents that these context m arkers shall “mean” the 
same for both parties.51 
 
In the above quotation, note that Bateson brings the contemplation of “contexts of learning” 
back to a discussion of systems, involving two or more persons, and the nature of their relationship. 
Although he does not plainly state his intention, we can fairly assume this reference to systems is a 
context marker that refers to his theories concerning mental process. Also, note the importance of 
“tacit agreement” and “context markers” in the operation of the stream of events that may lead to the 
change in punctuating events that he designates Learning II, e.g., the largely unconscious process of 
“learning about learning.” This suggests that in structuring the contexts of our classroom(s), we must 
be able to present and successfully com municate context markers in our postures, actions, and 
utterances—as well as in the physical layout of the learning environment—such  that the students can 
enter into the tacit agreements that enable Learning 0, Learning I, and Learning II.  
 

 22
The above leads to our consideration of Learning III. This type of learning involves a radical 
modification or expansion of one’s set of alternatives, e.g., “Learning III is change in the process of 
Learning II, e.g., a corrective change in the system  of sets  of alternatives f rom which choice is 
made.”52 This level of learning can be identified as a radical shift in perspective, or as developing the 
ability to cross the “boundaries” of different learning types. 
The very definition of this type of learning suggests that paradoxes and logical difficulties 
arise when we attempt to apprehend such phenom ena in logical discourse. Yet, without claiming 
personal knowledge, we may suppose that at this level of learning previously constricted awareness 
is released and new frames of reference are accessible. Here, Bateson cautiously observes that: 
Learning III is likely to be difficult and rare even in human beings. Expectably, it will 
also be dif ficult for scientists, who are only human, to im agine or describe this 
process. But it is claimed that something of this sort does from time to time occur in 
psychotherapy, religious conversion, and in  other sequences in which there is 
profound reorganization of character.53 
 
The profound reorganization of character that characterizes Learning III limits the usefulness 
of this level of learning for our discussion, but may disclose something of the nature of learning that 
has been left out of our previous discussion. First we should note that there can be a replacement of 
premises at the level of Learning II without the achievem ent of any Learning III. Hence, the 
profound reorganization of character indicative of Learning III is not a transposition of subclasses at 
the level of Learning II. However , such a transposition (exchanging one set of habituation for 
another) in and of itself m ust certainly be an accom plishment worth noting. Yet, the question 
remains, how are such transpositions achieved.  
Bateson suggests that one is “driven” to level III by “contraries” generated at level II, and it 
is the resolving of contraries that constitutes “positive reinforcement” at level III. I would suggest 
that since all learning cannot be the product of rote memorization, the experience of contraries, and 
their subsequent resolution, is the key to understanding much of what “moves” one through each of 
the previously discussed levels of learning: Learning 0, Learning I, and Learning II. Therefore, we 
may employ Bateson’s concept of Learning III as an extreme example of all transitional experience 
“between” the levels of learning.  
Precisely because it constitutes learning about Learning II, Learning III proposes paradox. 
Learning III may lead to either an increase or a limitation, and possibly a reduction of the habits 
acquired in Learning II. “Certainly it must lead to a greater flexibility in the premises acquired by the 
process of Learning II—a freedom from their bondage.”54 My point is that we m ay make similar 
 

 23
observations concerning the relationship between the punctuation of experience that occurs between 
Learning 0 and I, or between Learning I and II.  
Beyond the necessary components of rote learning and habituation, one is most likely driven, 
or nudged, into “higher” levels of learning through paradox and contraries. Similarly, any skill or 
ability that is integrated into one’ s mental system through the process of resolving paradox and 
contraries will lead to greater flexibility in the premises that govern the “lower” levels of learning. 
This “resolution of  contraries” will, in itself , positively reinf orce one’s having learned a given 
“lesson.” In structuring the contexts of a classroom system, we certainly should not attempt to drive 
our students into a Learning III experience. However , we should be able to learn how to fashion 
challenging contexts, which allow for safely experiencing contraries and paradoxes. Apparently, this 
is the experience that is needed in order to nudge one’s “self” into “higher” levels of learning. 
One final word concerning the processes involved in Learning III. In a sense this entire essay 
has been an invitation to the sort of “reorganization of character” that characterizes Learning III. Our 
brief examination of the holistic, self-regulating, self-organizing, mutually causal (hence, dialogic), 
and hierarchic characteristics of cybernetic systems was intended to set the context for considering a 
major portion of Bateson’s work. Given the f act that it is mind that learns, the explication of the 
holistic and dialogical model of mind which emerges out of Bateson’s criteria of mind—including 
his understanding of information, and his concept of the “world of communication”—was intended 
to prepare the contextual frame for considering Bateson’s learning theory. Clearly, the views thus 
presented invite the reader to reexamine commonly held dualistic notions concerning the “self,” as 
well as similar notions concerning the relationship between “self” and “other.” 
Bateson’s views thus propose a radical reexam ination of the principles that govern the 
instructor/student/classroom system. To be sure, the principles examined in this essay are not the 
only means of reaching the conclusions I have incrementally drawn along the way, nor do I claim 
that the principles here presented, and the conclusions here drawn are the only viable rationale 
around which we should reconstruct the classroom system. My intent has been merely to offer an 
alternative optic (one of many such valuable resources) through which we may view learning and 
pedagogy. These concluding observations are not simply standard disclaimers, offered as a means of 
conveniently bringing the essay to closure. It is my conviction that if the ideas presented in this essay 
are taken seriously, they call for a profound reorganization of the way we approach instruction and 
learning in the classroom. In this sense the above is an invitation to the sort of “reorganization of 
character” that is the hallmark of Learning III. 
 

 24
WORKS CITED 
 
Bateson, Gregory. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979.  
 
------. Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and 
Epistemology. San Francisco: Chandler Publishing Company, 1972.  
 
------. “Afterword.” In About Bateson, pp. 235-247. Edited by John Brockman. New York: E. P. 
Dutton, 1977.  
 
------. “The Message is Reinforcement,” in Language Behavior: A Book of Readings in 
Communication. Janua Linguarum: Studia Memoriae Nocolai Van Wijk Dedicata, Series 
Maior, no. 41, pp. 62-72. Edited by Johnnye Akin, Alvin Goldberg, Gail Myers, and 
Joseph Stewart. The Hague and Paris: Mouton & Co., 1971. 
 
------. “The Cybernetics of ‘Self’: A Theory of Alcoholism.” Psychiatry, 34 (February 1971):     
1-18; reprinted in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: Form and Pathology in 
Relationship, pp. 309-337.  
 
------. “Form, Substance, and Difference.” General Semantics Bulletin 37: 5-13. The Nineteenth 
Annual Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture, delivered at New York, January 9, 1970; 
reprinted in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part V: Epistemology and Ecology, pp. 454-
471.  
 
------. “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication.” in Steps to an Ecology of 
Mind, Part III: Form and Pathology in Relationship, pp. 279-308. [Expanded version of 
“The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication, and the Acquisition of World 
Views.” Paper presented at the Wenner-Gren Symposium on World Views: Their Nature 
and Their Role in Culture, Burg Wartenstein, Austria, August 2-11, 1968.]  
 
------. “Style, Grace, and Information in Primitive Art,” in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part II: 
Form and Pattern in Anthropology, pp. 128-152. 
 
------. “Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia.” A.M.A. Archives of General 
Psychiatry 2 (May 1960): 477-491; reprinted in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: 
Form and Pathology in Relationship, pp. 244-270. 
 
------. Comment on “The Comparative Study of Culture and the Purposive Cultivation of 
Democratic Values,” by Margaret Mead, in Science Philosophy and Religion; Second 
Symposium, Chapter IV, pp. 81-97. Edited by Lyman Bryson and Louis Finkelstein. New 
York: Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion in Their Relation to the 
Democratic Way of Life, Inc., 1942; reprinted as, “Social Planning and the Concept of 
 

 25
Deutero-Learning,” in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: Form and Pathology in 
Relationship, pp. 159-176. 
 
Bateson, Gregory, and Bateson, Mary Catherine. Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the 
Sacred. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1987.  
 
Brockman, John, ed.; Bateson, M. C.; Birdwhistell, R. L.; Lipset, D.; May, R.; Mead, M.; and 
Schlossberg, E. About Bateson. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1977. “Afterword” by Gregory 
Bateson.  
 
Krippendorff, Klaus. “The Power of Communication and the Communication of Power: Toward 
an Emancipatory Theory of Communication.” Communication 12 (July 1991): 175-196. 
 
Laszlo, Ervin. Introduction to Systems Philosophy. New York: Harper Torchbook, 1973. 
 
McCulloch, Warren S. Embodiments of Mind. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1965.  
 
Vickers, Geoffrey, Sir. Value Systems and Social Process. New York: Basic Books, 1968.  
 
Whyte, Lancelot L. “The Structural Hierarchy in Organisms.” In Unity in Diversity: A Festschrift 
for Ludwig Von Bertalanffy, pp. 271-285; Vol. 1 of 2 vols. Edited by William Gray and, 
Nicholas D. Rizzo. New York: Gordon and Breach, 1973.  
 
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics—or Contr ol and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948. 
 

 
 
                                                          
NOTES 
 
     1 Warren S. McCulloch, Embodiments of Mind (Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1965). McCulloch was 
a key member of the group that did the original work in cybernetics, and he is referred to by Bateson more often 
than any other modern scientist.  
     2 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics—or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine  (New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948), p. 11. 
     3 However, following Bateson many theorists reject the use of energy and matter in this context—except in those 
instances where they act as information and thus have communicational value. 
     4 Ervin Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, pp. 57-117; also, pp. 177-180. 
     5 Lancelot L. Whyte, “The Structural Hierarchy in Organisms,” in Unity in Diversity: A Festschrift for Ludwig 
von Bertalanffy, pp. 271-285, edited by William Gray and Nicholas D. Rizzo (New York: Gordon and Breach, 
1973), p. 275. 
     6 Ervin Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, p. 175. 
     7 Sir Geoffrey Vickers, Value Systems and Social Progress (New York: Basic Books Inc., 1968), pp. 176-209. 
8 Ibid., pp. 183-184; see also, pp. xi-xxii. 
     9 Gregory Bateson, Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979), p. 92. 
(Hereafter — Mind & Nature) 
     10 Ibid., p. 92. 
     11 Mind & Nature, p. 92 [emphasis mine]. 
     12 Ibid., pp. 92-94. 
     13  Ibid., p. 212. 
     14 “Glossary,” in Mind & Nature, p. 228. 
     15 “Form, Substance, and Difference,” in Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in 
Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (San Francisco: Chandler Publishing Company, 1972),     
pp. 457-461 (Hereafter — STEPS). 
     16 Ibid., p. 459 
     17 Mind & Nature, p. 100. Qualifying the word triggered, Bateson notes that, “Firearms are a somewhat 
inappropriate metaphor because in most simple [nonrepeating] firearms there is only a lineal sequence of energetic 
dependencies. . . In biological systems, the end of the lineal sequence sets up conditions for a future repetition,” p. 
101n. 
     18 “Afterword,” in About Bateson, Edited by John Brockman (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1977), p. 243. 
     19 “The Cybernetics of ‘Self ‘: A Theory of Alcoholism,” STEPS, p. 316.  
     20 Ibid., p. 317. 
     21 Gregory Bateson and Mary Catherine Bateson, Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred (New 
York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1987), p. 19; this work was posthumously reconstructed, edited and co-authored 
by Bateson’s daughter, Mary Catherine Bateson. 

 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
     22 “Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia,” in STEPS, p. 250. 
     23 Ibid. 
     24 Mind & Nature, p. 191. 
     25 Ibid., p. 94. 
     26  “Form, Substance, and Difference,” in STEPS, p. 464. 
     27 Mind & Nature, p. 86. 
     28 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 282. Bateson addressed learning 
theory in several essays. The above, written in 1964 and given its final form in 1971, gives his definitive accounting 
on the topic. Also see, Gregory Bateson, Comment on “The Comparative Study of Culture and the Purposive 
Cultivation of Democratic Values,” by Margaret Mead, in Science Philosophy and Religion; Second Symposium, 
Chapter IV , pp. 81-97, edited by Lyman Bryson and Louis Finkelstein (New York: Conference on Science, 
Philosophy and Religion in Their Relation to the Democratic Way of Life, Inc., 1942); reprinted as, “Social Planning 
and the Concept of Deutero-Learning,” in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Part III: Form and Pathology in 
Relationship, pp. 159-176; also, “The Message is Reinforcement,” in Language Behavior: A Book of Readings in 
Communication, Janua Linguarum: Studia Memoriae Nocolai Van Wijk Dedicata, Series Maior, no. 41, pp. 62-72, 
edited by Johnnye Akin, et al. (The Hague and Paris: Mouton & Co., 1971). 
     29 Ibid., p. 283, n 3. Subtly maintaining his distinction between the mental and physical sciences, Bateson notes 
that, “the Newtonian equations which describe the motions of a ‘particle’ stop at the level of ‘acceleration.’ Change 
of acceleration can only happen with deformation of the moving body, but the Newtonian ‘particle’ was not made up 
of ‘parts’ and was therefore (logically) incapable of deformation or any other internal change. It was therefore not 
subject to rate of change of acceleration.” 
     30 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 293. Bateson’s description of 
Learning IV clearly marks it as a special instance of learning: “Learning IV would be change in Learning III. 
[Which probably does not occur, but . . .] Evolutionary process has, however, created organisms whose ontogeny 
bring them to Level III. The combination of phylogenesis with ontogenesis, in fact, achieves Level IV .” 
     31 Ibid., p. 284. 
     32 Ibid., p. 293. 
     33 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 284. 
     34 Ibid., p. 286. Bateson notes that, “There is also an interesting class of cases in which the sets of alternatives 
contain common members. It is then possible for the organism to be ‘right’ but for the wrong reasons. This form of 
error is inevitably self-reinforcing.” 
     35 Ibid., p. 287.  
     36 Ibid. 
     37 Ibid., p. 289. 
     38 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 288. 
     39 Ibid., p. 289. 
     40 Ibid., p. 292. 
 

 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
     41 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 290. 
     42 Ibid., p. 290. 
     43 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS,  pp. 292-293. Bateson notes that 
“various terms have been proposed in the literature for various phenomena of this order. ‘Deutero-learning,’ ‘set 
learning,’ ‘learning to learn,’ and ‘transfer of learning’ may be mentioned.”  
     44 Ibid., p. 293. 
     45 Ibid., p. 302. 
     46 “Style, Grace, and Information in Primitive Art,” in STEPS, pp. 128-152; see, p. 148. 
     47 “Style, Grace, and Information in Primitive Art,” in STEPS, p. 142.  
     48 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, pp. 300, 301. 
     49 Ibid., p. 301. 
     50 Klaus Krippendorff, “The Power of Communication and the Communication of Power; Toward an 
Emancipatory Theory of Communication,” p. 192.  
     51 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 298. 
 
     52 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 293. 
     53 Ibid., p. 301. 
     54 “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” in STEPS, p. 304. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
copyright© 2000 by Down 'n Out Press All rights reserved 