Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey
Hendrickx Kilian* · Perini Lorenzo* · Van
der Plas Dries · Meert Wannes · Davis Jesse
Received: 23 July 2021 / Revised: 27 July 2023 & 15 February 2024
Abstract Machine learning models always make a prediction, even when it is
likely to be inaccurate. This behavior should be avoided in many decision support
applications, where mistakes can have severe consequences. Albeit already studied
in 1970, machine learning with rejection recently gained interest. This machine
learning subfield enables machine learning models to abstain from making a prediction when likely to make a mistake.
This survey aims to provide an overview on machine learning with rejection.
We introduce the conditions leading to two types of rejection, ambiguity and novelty rejection, which we carefully formalize. Moreover, we review and categorize
strategies to evaluate a model’s predictive and rejective quality. Additionally, we
define the existing architectures for models with rejection and describe the standard techniques for learning such models. Finally, we provide examples of relevant
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
· K. Hendrickx
Siemens Digital Industries Software, Leuven, Belgium
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
E-mail: kilian.hendrickx@cs.kuleuven.be
L. Perini
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
E-mail: lorenzo.perini@cs.kuleuven.be
D. Van der Plas
OSG bv, Natus Medical, Kontich, Belgium
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
E-mail: dries.vanderplas@cs.kuleuven.be
W. Meert
KU Leuven; Leuven.AI, Leuven, Belgium
E-mail: wannes.meert@cs.kuleuven.be
J. Davis
KU Leuven; Leuven.AI, Leuven, Belgium
E-mail: jesse.davis@cs.kuleuven.be
Corresponding author: Kilian Hendrickx
arXiv:2107.11277v3  [cs.LG]  21 Feb 2024

2 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
application domains and show how machine learning with rejection relates to other
machine learning research areas.
Keywords Machine learning with rejection · Supervised learning· Trustworthy
machine learning
Mathematics Subject Classification (2020) 68T05· 68T02
Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 The learning with reject problem setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3 Evaluating models with rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
4 Separated rejector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5 Dependent rejector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6 Integrated rejector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
7 Combining multiple rejectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
8 Applications of machine learning models with rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
9 Link to other research areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
10 Conclusions and perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 3
1 Introduction
The canonical task in machine learning is to learn a predictive model that captures
the relationship between a set of input variables and a target variable on the basis
of training data. Machine-learned models are powerful because, after training, they
offer the ability to make accurate predictions about future examples. Since this
enables automating a number of tasks that are difficult and/or time-consuming,
such models are ubiquitously deployed.
However, their key functionality of always returning a prediction for a given
novel input is also a drawback. While the model may produce accurate predictions
in general, in certain circumstances this may not be the case. For instance, there
could be certain regions of the feature space where the model struggles to differentiate among the different classes. Or the current test example could be highly
dissimilar to the data used to train the model. In certain application domains,
such as medical diagnostics (Kotropoulos and Arce 2009) and engineering (Zou
et al. 2011), mispredictions can have serious consequences. Therefore, it would
be beneficial for a model to be cautious in situations where it is uncertain about
its predictions. The prediction task could be deferred to a human expert in these
situations.
One way to accomplish this is to use machine learning models with rejection.
Such models assess their confidence in each prediction and have the option to
abstain from making a prediction when they are likely to make a mistake. This
ability to abstain from making a prediction has several benefits. First, by only
making predictions when it is confident, it can result in improved performance
for the retained examples (Pudil et al. 1992). Second, avoiding mispredictions can
increase a user’s trust in the system (El-Yaniv and Wiener 2010). Third, it can still
result in time savings by only requiring human interventions to make decisions in
a small number of cases. Fourth, avoiding strongly biased predictions helps build a
more fair model (Lee et al. 2021; Ruggieri et al. 2023). This machine learning subfield was already studied in 1970 by Chow (1970) and Hellman (1970). However,
the proliferation of applications has resulted in renewed interest in this area.
This survey aims to provide an overview of the subfield of machine learning
with rejection, which we structure around eight key research questions.
Q1. How can we formalize the conditions for which a model should abstain from
making a prediction?
Q2. How can we evaluate the performance of a model with rejection?
Q3. What architectures are possible for operationalizing (i.e., putting this into practice) the ability to abstain from making a prediction?
Q4. How do we learn models with rejection?
Q5. What are the main pros and cons of using a specific architecture?
Q6. How can we combine multiple rejectors?
Q7. Where does the need for machine learning with rejection methods arise in
real-world applications?
Q8. How does machine learning with rejection relate to other research areas?
In addition to the individual contributions of addressing each of these research
questions, our major contribution is that we identify the main characteristics of
machine learning models with rejection, allowing us to structure the methods in
this research field. By providing an overview of the research field as well as deeper

4 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
insights into the various techniques, we aid in further advance this research area,
as well as its adaptation to real-world applications.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we formalize
the setting in which machine learning with rejection operates and identify the two
main motivations to abstain from making a prediction (Q1). Section 3 introduces
the means to evaluate the performance of models with rejection (Q2). Sections 4, 5,
and 6 provide a structured overview of the actionable techniques to reject based on
the relevant literature. In these sections, we focus on describing the architecture
(Q3), the rejector’s learning (Q4), and the key pros and cons (Q5). In Section 7
we explore how to combine multiple rejectors to allow different types of rejection
(Q6) Section 8 discusses the main application fields (Q7), while Section 9 explores
the relation of machine learning with rejection with other research areas (Q8).
Finally, Section 10 summarizes our conclusions and lists the main open research
questions.
2 The learning with reject problem setting
In the standard supervised setting, a learner has access to a training set D =
{(x1,y 1),..., (xn,y n)}, where eachxi is ad dimensional vector andyi is the target.
The training data is assumed to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
according to some unknown probability measure P (with density p(X,Y )). More
generally, we denote the feature space asX and the target space asY, which could
be discreteY ={1, 2,...,K }, continuousY = R, or even probabilistic Y = [0, 1].
The assumption is that there is an unknown, non-deterministic functionf :X→
Y that maps the examples to their target value. Given a hypothesis space H of
functions h:X →Y, the goal of a learner is to find a good approximation to f.
Typically, this can be done by finding a model h∈H with a small expected risk
R which is usually approximated using the training data
R(h) :=
Z
X×Y
L(h(x),y )dP(x,y )≈
nX
i=1
L(h(xi),y i)
n , (1)
where L is a suitable loss function such as the squared or zero-one loss.
2.1 Models with a reject option
In learning with rejection, the output space of the model is extended to include a
new value ® (Cortes et al. 2016a, 2018; Gamelas Sousa et al. 2014a). This new
symbol means that the model abstains from making a prediction. When performing
classification with rejection, which is also called cautious classification, this new
output ® can be seen as an additional class (Ferri and Hern´ andez-Orallo 2004).
Conceptually, since h only approximates the true underlying model, there are
likely regions ofX whereh systematically differs fromf. Specifically, discrepancies
betweenh and f can be due to inconsistent data (e.g., classes overlapping), insufficient data (e.g., unexplored regions), or even incorrect model assumptions (e.g.,
h must be linear while f is not). Therefore, the goal of rejection is to determine
such regions in order to abstain from making likely inaccurate predictions.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 5
Formally, a model with rejection m:X →Y∪{ ®} is represented by a pair
(h,r ), where h:X →Y is the predictor and r:R→ R is the rejector. Note that
the rejector may use a variety of different inputs such as examples ( R = X),
confidence or probability values ( R = [0, 1]), or even both ( R =X× [0, 1]). At
prediction time, m outputs the symbol ® and abstains from making predictions
when the rejectorr determines that the predictor is at a heightened risk of making
a misprediction and otherwise returns the predictor’s output:
m(x) =
(
® if the prediction is rejected;
h(x) if the prediction is accepted.
(2)
At prediction time, the key design decision for a model with rejection is how to
structure the relationship between the predictor and rejector. Based on our analysis
of the literature, we have identified three common architectural principles.
Separated rejector architecture. The rejector operates independently from the
predictor. The most typical operationalization of this architecture lets the rejector serve as a filter that decides whether to pass a test example to the
predictor. Figure 1 shows the test time data flow of a separated rejector.
Dependent rejector architecture. Here, the rejector bases its decision on the
output of the predictor. For instance, the dependent rejector can look at how
close a prediction is to the predictor’s decision boundary and abstain if it is
too close. Figure 2 shows the data flow for the dependent rejector.
Integrated rejector architecture. This principle involves integrating the rejector and predictor into a single model m by treating rejection as an additional
class that can be returned by the modelm. Thus, it is impossible to distinguish
between the role of the predictor h and the rejector r. Figure 3 illustrates this
scenario.
Fig. 1: Data flow in a separated rejector, in which both the predictor and the
rejector are stand-alone models. The rejector is a filter and only passes accepted
examples to the predictor.
2.2 Types of rejection
At a high-level, a learned predictor can exhibit (high) uncertainty in its predictions
for four reasons:
R1. There can be cases where a vector xi∈X is associated with multiple values
from the target space Y. This can arise in situations such as when classes
overlap in classification tasks.

6 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Fig. 2: Data flow in a dependent rejector. First, the predictor processes the example
at hand. Next, the rejector assesses the confidence in the prediction based on the
predictor’s representation of the example.
Fig. 3: Data flow in an integrated rejector, in which the predictor and rejector
are one model. This model embeds the reject and predict functions and directly
outputs a prediction or a rejection.
R2. Some instances in the training data are incorrect (e.g., the values of certain
features were recorded incorrectly, labeling errors).
R3. P(X,Y ) might differ between the training phase and deployment (e.g., concept
drift). Consequently, the training data is no longer representative.
R4. Some examples x could simply not be acquired due to their inherent rarity
(anomalies, out-of-distribution).
Based on this intuition, two types of rejections can be performed:
Ambiguity Rejection: occurs if x falls in a region where the target y is ambiguous (R1 and R2). This often occurs in regions that are close to the decision
boundary in classification tasks;
Novelty Rejection: occurs if x falls in a region where there was little (or no)
training data. Hence, the predictor may struggle to make accurate predictions
because it did not see enough data to accurately model the relationship between
X and Y (R3 and R4).
2.2.1 Ambiguity Rejection
Ambiguity rejection allows a model to abstain from making a prediction for an
example x in regions where, despite having access to some training examples, the
model h fails to capture the correct relationship f betweenX andY (Flores 1958;
Hellman 1970; Fukunaga and Kessell 1972). This can happen for two reasons.
First, the observed relationship between X and Y is not deterministic. This
can arise due to the intrinsic probabilistic nature of Y|X, which a deterministic
predictor h cannot handle (e.g., coin toss), or the training data containing too
many errors (e.g., incorrectly labeled examples), which would make it difficult for
h to approximate f. In classification, this can arise due to classes overlapping in

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 7
certain regions of the instance-space (Figure 4a), while in regression, it leads to
high variance in the target variable in certain regions (Figure 5a). One way to
interpret this issue is that the chosen feature space does not allow for accurately
determining the target value (e.g., missing features might cause examples with
different predictions to be projected onto the same example (Van Craenendonck
et al. 2018, Figure 2)).
Second, a poor choice of the predictor’s hypothesis space makes it impossible to
learn the relationship between X and Y . This occurs when the chosen hypothesis
spaceH does not include f. Figure 4b illustrates this error in binary classification,
where only linear models (e.g., perceptron) are considered for H while the true
target concept f is non-linear. Similarly, Figure 5b shows a regression problem
withH as the family of quadratic models, while f is non-quadratic. In both cases,
the expected prediction error is large for certain examples because f̸∈H .
2.2.2 Novelty Rejection
Many machine learning models struggle when forced to extrapolate to regions of
the feature space that were not (sufficiently) present in the training data (Cordella
et al. 1995a; Sambu Seo et al. 2000; Vailaya and Jain 2000).
Novelty rejection allows a model to abstain from making predictions for examples that are sufficiently different from the training data (Dubuisson and Masson
1993). For such examples, the predictor h is likely to make mistakes because the
absence of training data similar to x preventsh from learning the correct target y.
In practice, this arises when one of the following assumptions of the training
procedure is violated. First, the sampling distribution differs from the true distribution. Thus, parts of the feature space are not represented in the data (e.g., the
data does not contain any examples of patients suffering from a particular rare
disease) (Van der Plas et al. 2021) or one cannot generate data for all imaginable situations (e.g., a sensor can break in many different ways) (Hendrickx et al.
2022; Urahama and Furukawa 1995; Hsu et al. 2020). Second, the skew in the class
distribution is too large that the model ignores parts of the feature space. Thus,
the predictor may choose to ignore these examples in its objective to optimize
the accuracy model-complexity trade-off. Third, a new distribution appears after
training and these new examples are out-of-distribution. For instance, this can
arise due to drift that leads to new classes (Landgrebe et al. 2004) or an adversarial agent that deliberately tries to mislead (Wang and Yiu 2020; Corbi` ere et al.
2022).
Figures 4c and 5c illustrate this rejection type for a classification and a regression problem. In both cases, the three black stars represent test examples that
are far away from the training examples. The learned model h may be inaccurate
in these regions due to the lack of training data, which increases the chance of
making a misprediction for these test examples.
The importance of novelty rejection often becomes particularly apparent in
medical applications since in many of these applications, it is challenging or expensive to get an exhaustive training set. Therefore, the training set might only
include patients from specific age groups or with particular medical conditions. For
instance, Van der Plas et al. (2021) learned a sleep stage classifier but only had
access to a training set containing adult patients. Consequently, the model may
not perform well when applied in practice to patients that are different than those

8 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
a)
 b)
 c)
Positive (+) Negative (-) Ambiguity Reject (+) Ambiguity Reject (-) Novelty Reject
Fig. 4: Illustration of a classification scenario where the two classes overlap in
a region. The dotted lines represent the rejector, the dash-dotted line the fitted
predictor h, and the solid line the ground truth relation f. a) shows ambiguity
rejection due to a non-deterministic relation between X and Y , b) introduces
ambiguity rejection due to the model bias, and c) illustrates an example of novelty
rejection. While in the first two plots the rejection region is inside the two dotted
lines (examples with cross marks are rejected), in the third figure the rejected
novel examples (stars) are outside the dotted line.
a)
 b)
 c)
Accept Ambiguity Reject Novelty Reject Rejector
Fig. 5: Illustration of a regression scenario where rejection can be applied. The
dash-dotted line represents the predictor h, while the solid line indicates the true
function f. In a), examples in between the dotted lines are rejected (cross mark)
due to the high variance of Y . In b), examples indicated with the cross mark are
rejected due to the incorrect model bias. In c), star-marked examples are rejected
because they differ from the training data (novelties).
encountered during training such as children or people suffering from extremely
rare disorders. However, this information and the assumptions made during data
collection might not be available to the user of the model. Therefore, adding a
novelty rejector is crucial to avoid poor prediction performance on these patients.
In this case, a rejector based on a LOF outlier detector can reject the predictions
from children as they have a different morphology than the adults in the training
set (Figure 6). This mitigates the risk of incorrect predictions.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 9
Fig. 6: Results of a novelty reject option in a sleep stage scoring application
(Van der Plas et al. 2021). The predictor is trained only on adults. The accuracy
on children (66.8%) is much lower than the accuracy on adults (77.7%). Introducing the reject option mitigates the risk of making incorrect predictions as it ends
up rejecting the predictions for most children.
3 Evaluating models with rejection
Rejection
Prediction
No Yes
Correct True accept (TA) False reject (FR)
Incorrect False accept (FA) True reject (TR)
Table 1: Confusion matrix for learning-to-reject models. The columns show
whether an example is rejected, the rows show whether h’s prediction is correct.
Conceptually, a model with a reject option involves evaluating the outputs of both
the predictor and the rejector. Thus, its performance can be viewed through the
prism of the confusion matrix shown in Table 1, where the columns represent
the rejector’s decision and the rows whether the predictor’s output is correct or
not. Intuitively, the learning-to-reject model is “correct” if a correct prediction is
returned to the user (a true accept) or an example is rejected when the model’s
prediction was wrong (a true reject). It is considered to have made a “mistake” if
the model provides the user with an incorrect prediction (false accept) or rejects
an example for which the model’s prediction was correct.
Viewed through this lens, a model with rejection has two goals. On the one
hand, it wants to have high accuracyA on examples for which it makes a prediction:
A = TA
TA +FA.
This makes the model reliable as practitioners can trust its outputs. On the other
hand, it wants to have high coverage:
ϕ = TA +FA
TA +FA +FR +TR.

10 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
That is, it should make a prediction for as many test examples as possible (De Stefano et al. 2000; El-Yaniv and Wiener 2010; Lei 2014). This can alternatively be
viewed as having a low rejection rate, defined as 1−ϕ. This makes the model useful
in practice as its predictions can be utilized for decision-making. Unfortunately,
these two goals are competing as the accuracy can be increased by limiting the
predictions to the most confident cases, i.e., reducing the coverage (Hansen et al.
1997; Homenda et al. 2016). As a result, metrics specifically tailored to learning
to reject must capture this trade-off (Cordelia et al. 1998).
Broadly speaking, three categories of metrics exist that evaluate different aspects of a model with rejection:
Evaluating models for a given rejection rate : This entails having a fixed rejection
rate provided by the user. In this case, one only needs to evaluate performance
on the non-rejected examples and it is possible to use the standard evaluations
(e.g., accuracy (Golfarelli et al. 1997));
Evaluating the overall model performance/rejection trade-off : One can plot the rejection rate on the x-axis and the predictor’s performance obtained on a representative test set on the y-axis, similar to Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) analysis;
Evaluating models through a cost function : This case only requires knowing the model’s
output and the costs for (mis)predictions and rejections.
3.1 Evaluating models with a fixed rejection rate.
Given a dataset and a fixed rejection rate, Condessa et al. (2017) argue that a
good evaluation metric should meet four main criteria: given a fixed predictor,
such metric should: (p1) depend on the model’s rejection rate; (p2) be able to
compare two models with different rejectors for a given rejection rate (and for the
same predictor); (p3) be able to compare two models with different rejectors with
different rejection rates when one clearly outperforms the other; (p4) reach its
maximum value for a perfect rejector (i.e., a rejector that rejects all misclassified
examples) and its minimum value for a rejector that rejects all accurate predictions.
In addition, Condessa et al. (2017) propose three types of evaluation metrics that
meet the required conditions:
a) Prediction quality. The model’s prediction quality (PQ) measures the predictor’s performance on the non-rejected examples. For instance, one can use
classical evaluation metrics on the accepted examples such as the accuracy
PQ acc = TA
TA +FA,
the F-scores (Pillai et al. 2011; Mesquita et al. 2016) or any other evaluation
metric, including fairness metrics (Madras et al. 2018). While this allows comparing models with different rejectors, looking only at the prediction quality
will tend to favor the model with the highest rejection rate. By being more
conservative (i.e., having a lower coverage), the model tends only to offer predictions for the subset of examples for which it is most confident.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 11
b) Rejection quality. The rejection quality (RQ) indicates the rejector’s ability to
reject misclassified examples. One way to do this is by comparing the ratio of
misclassified examples on the rejected subset (T R
F R) to the ratio on the complete
dataset ( F A+T R
T A+F R), i.e.
RQratio = TR
FR
.FA +TR
TA +FR.
Looking only at the rejection quality will favor models with the lowest rejection
rate. The lower the rejection rate is, the more likely the rejector is to abstain
only on those few examples for which it is most confident that the predictor
will make a mistake.
c) Combined quality. The combined quality (CQ) evaluates the model with a
reject option as a whole. One way to accomplish this is by combining the
predictor’s performance on the non-rejected examples (prediction quality) with
the rejector’s performance on the misclassified examples (rejection quality). For
instance, using PQ acc and RQratio yields to
CQacc-ratio = TA +TR
TA +FA +FR +TR.
Overall, the combined quality offers a more holistic assessment of the model’s
overall performance as it measures both the predictor’s and the rejector’s quality (Lin et al. 2018). The downside is that aggregating the two metrics yields a
less fine-grained characterization of the model performance. Specifically, in case
a model has low CQ, it is hard to ascertain which component, the predictor or
rejector, is contributing the most to the model’s poor performance.
Pros and Cons. The main advantage of this category is that the metrics clearly
measure the fine-grained model performance in the given setting. However, using
one of these types of metrics may be limiting in some cases. For instance, theoretical research may not care about evaluating the model with rejection for a specific
rejection rate, as it is usually specified based on domain knowledge. Moreover,
given a rejection rate, not all performance metrics can be always used, as some
may suffer from task-related issues. For instance, rejecting a whole class would not
allow utilizing metrics like F1-score and AUC for the prediction quality as they
need both classes’ labels.
3.2 Evaluating the model performance/rejection trade-off.
To assess the performance-rejection trade-off, a common approach is to evaluate
the prediction quality (for non-rejected examples) by varying the rejection rate
from 0% to 100%, which is known as the Accuracy-Reject Curve (ARC) (Nadeem
et al. 2010). This involves plotting the rejection rate on the x-axis and the prediction quality (e.g., accuracy) on the y-axis (Hanczar and Sebag 2014). Higher curves
indicate better performance. Alternatively, risk-based metrics like mean squared
error can be plotted, with lower curves indicating better performance (Sambu Seo
et al. 2000). Sometimes the predictor’s performance on the rejected examples is
also shown with the intuition that it should be worse on this subset of the data
than on the accepted ones (Zou et al. 2011; Condessa et al. 2015c,b).

12 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Fig. 7: Example of an accuracy-reject curve in which Van der Plas et al. (2023)
compare two of their proposed models with a novelty reject option (blue) with two
models that were used as baseline (black). The proposed models outperform the
baselines but the light blue model only does for rejection rates lower than 0 .01.
When comparing two models using the ARC method, two scenarios arise. First,
one model clearly outperforms the other in terms of prediction quality for all
rejection rates. Second, the models show varying prediction quality across different
rejection rates. To illustrate this, consider Figure 7 where the light blue curve only
outperforms the black curves if the rejection rate is lower than 0.01. When it is not
clear which model performs best, the overall performance can be assessed using
the Area Under the ARC Curve (AURC), similar to the AUC in standard machine
learning (Vanderlooy et al. 2006a,b; Landgrebe et al. 2006). In this example, the
AURC of the light blue curve will be higher than the AURC of the black curves,
indicating that it performs better overall than the black curves.
Pros and Cons. The main advantage of this category is that any prediction quality
metric can be used on the y-axis. Moreover, they provide a high-level overview
of how the model works for different rejection rates. However, generating these
curves can be challenging for two reasons. First, some rejectors do not allow directly setting the rejection rate (Wu et al. 2007; Homenda et al. 2014), but they
might have other hyperparameters (e.g., rejection threshold). Mapping these to
rejection rates may be challenging and may not be possible to achieve all possible
rejection rates. Second, altering the rejection rate of a model with rejection can
require completely retraining the whole model. This may be too computationally
demanding to perform a fine-grained analysis (Condessa et al. 2017).
3.3 Evaluating models through a cost function.
For classification tasks, one can ask the user to specify the costs for (mis)predictions
as well as for rejection and evaluate a model by its (expected) total cost at test
time. Although the costs can be designed as a continuous function of the examples (Mozannar and Sontag 2020; De et al. 2021), the cost function typically
accounts only for three constant costs: the cost of correct predictionCc, the cost of
a prediction errorCe, and the cost of rejectionCr such thatCc <C r <C e (De Stefano et al. 2000; Balsubramani 2016; Condessa et al. 2013). Without loss of generality, usually one assumes normalized costs, i.e., Cc = 0, Ce = 1 and Cr∈ [0, 1]

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 13
in which the normalized value for Cr can be obtained from the initial values as
Cr−Cc
Ce−Cc
. Although the costs need to be set based on some domain knowledge, there
are two constraints for setting the rejection cost properly. First, it must be lower
than a random predictor’s average cost for a classification task with K classes,
i.e. Cr≤ 1
K (Cordella et al. 1995b; Herbei and Wegkamp 2006). Otherwise, the
expected cost of always making a random prediction would be lower than the rejection cost, which nullifies the task of rejection. Second, one should account for
possible imbalance classes by setting Cr≤ 1−maxk≤KP(Y =k), where P(Y =k)
is the class frequency (Perini et al. 2023). In fact, for higherCr, a naive model that
always predicts the most frequent class¯k would obtain a cost equal to 1−P(Y = ¯k)
and rejecting examples would not be worth it for higher rejection costs.
Pros and Cons. The main benefit of this category is its high interpretability: given
a final cost, we can easily go back to the causes that yield such a cost. Moreover,
one can use the same cost function to optimize the model parameters during the
learning phase. This ensures coherence between learning the optimal model at
training time and measuring its performance at test time. However, this category
has the key drawback that the user must set the cost function based on domain
knowledge, which is not always easy to obtain. Setting different costs changes
the quality of the models, which may end up ranking several compared models
differently. A way to alleviate this would be to make the Cost-Reject plot (Hanczar
2019), where, similar to the ARC, the x-axis and y-axis represent respectively the
normalized rejection cost and the normalized prediction cost (Friedel et al. 2006;
Abbas et al. 2019).
4 Separated rejector
Separated rejectors operate by filtering out unlikely examples. They are typically
used for novelty rejection though there are some examples of using them for ambiguity rejection (Asif and Minhas 2020). Because the rejector does not use the
predictor’s output in any way, it is typically a function of the examples:r:X→ R.
Formally, the separated architecture yields the following model:
m(x) =
(
® if r(x)<τ
h(x) otherwise. (3)
If the rejector r outputs a value less than τ, then the model m rejects the example
(®). Otherwise, m uses the predictor h to make a prediction.
The separation between predictor and rejector means that the rejector is learned
independently of the predictor. The learning task involves learning the rejector
itself as well as setting the threshold τ. To align with its goal of identifying unlikely or unexpected examples, a common choice is to use anomaly/outlier, out-ofdistribution, or novelty detection algorithms. Three categories of methods can be
used for this goal: models that 1) estimate p(X), 2) are one-class classifiers, and
3) quantify the degree of novelty using a data-driven score function.

14 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Learning a separated rejector. A first option to learn a separated rejector is to
use a probabilistic model that estimates the marginal density p(X) and to reject
a test example x if p(x)< τ. These probabilistic models often make assumptions
about the distribution of the examples and are trained to maximize the likelihood
of the training dataset (Vasconcelos et al. 1993). For instance, Landgrebe et al.
(2004) proposes a locally normal distribution assumption and uses a Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM) to estimate p(X) with a specified number of components
whereas others have considered Variational Autoencoders (Wang and Yiu 2020)
and Normalizing Flows (Nalisnick et al. 2019).
Another option to learn a separated rejector is by employing a one-class classification model. Generally, they enclose the dataset into a specific surface and
flag any example that falls outside such region as novelty. For instance, a typical
approach is to use a One-Class Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) to encapsulate the training data through a hypersphere (Coenen et al. 2020; Homenda et al.
2014). By adjusting the size of the hypersphere, the proportion of non-rejected
examples can be increased (Wu et al. 2007).
Alternatively, some models assign scores that represent the degree of novelty
of each example (i.e., the higher the more novel), such asLOF (Van der Plas et al.
2023) or Neural Networks (Hsu et al. 2020). When dealing with these methods,
one often initially transforms the scores into novelty probabilities using heuristic
functions, such as sigmoid and squashing (Vercruyssen et al. 2018), or Gaussian
Processes (Martens et al. 2023). Then, the rejection threshold can be set to reject
examples with high novelty probability.
Learning the rejection thresholdτ. The rejection threshold τ is a crucial parameter that determines whether an example is rejected or not. In many cases, the
threshold is set based on domain knowledge. For instance, one can introduce adversarial examples and set a threshold to reject them all (Hosseini et al. 2017). In
case the number of novelties is unknown, one can use existing methods to estimate
the contamination factor, i.e. the proportion of novelties, and set the threshold accordingly (Perini et al. 2022b,a). Otherwise, heuristics can be employed, such as
rejecting examples falling within the first or second percentiles of correctly classified training examples (Wang and Yiu 2020).
Benefits and drawbacks of a separated rejector. Using a separated rejector has
several benefits. First, the rejector is predictor agnostic. Hence, it can be combined
with any type of predictor. Second, because the rejector can be trained independently of the predictor, it is possible to augment an existing predictor with a
reject option using this architecture. Third, by serving as a filter, the predictor
makes fewer predictions. This is particularly advantageous when there is a high
computational cost associated with using the predictor. Finally, this architecture
is generally simpler to operationalize compared to rejectors that interact with the
predictor. However, there are two evidentdrawbacks. First, not sharing information
between the predictor and the rejector results often in sub-optimal rejection performance (Homenda et al. 2014). Second, this architecture is typically only used
for novelty rejection because it is naturally related to assessing whether x is rare
or not while ambiguity rejection requires information on p(Y|X), which is often
estimated through the predictor’s output.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 15
5 Dependent rejector
Dependent rejectors analyze the predictor’s output to identify examples that the
predictor is likely to mispredict. The rejector is typically represented as a confidence function ch :X→ [0, 1] that measures how likely the predictor is to make a
correct prediction. Formally, the model for a dependent architecture has the form:
m(x) =
(
® if r(x;h)<τ ;
h(x) otherwise. (4)
where r may depend on the feature vector x, and on the predictor h through
the confidence function ch. Similar to the separated rejector, the model rejects
the example ( ®) only if the rejector outputs a value lower than τ. Without loss
of generality, we assume the confidence values ch(x)∈ [0, 1], as one can always
transform a score function into this range.
The learning task for a dependent rejector usually entails (1) selecting a confidence function that measures how confident the predictor is in its predictions,
and (2) setting the rejection threshold τ.
Learning a dependent rejector: types of confidence functionch. The form of the
confidence function depends on the desired rejection type. For ambiguity rejection,
the metric should indicate the variability of the target variable or the potential
predictor bias. For novelty rejection, the confidence should capture the example’s
similarity to the training data. We distinguish among four ways to derive the
confidence scores: i) estimating the conditional probability P(Y|X), ii) estimating
the class conditional density p(X|Y ), iii) performing a sensitivity analysis, and iv)
exploiting the predictor’s properties.
The conditional probability approaches allow for ambiguity rejections by using
the maximum of the class conditional probability as confidence function (Pazzani
et al. 1994; Fumera et al. 2004; Lam and Suen 1995)
ch(x) = max
k∈Y
P(Y =k|X =x) (5)
where k is either the true target value or the predictor’s output. Low P(Y|X)
values for two or more targets k1,k 2∈Y indicate high randomness of the data
or proximity to the decision boundary (Arlandis et al. 2002). Deriving the conditional probabilities from the predictor’s outputs can be done by post-processing
the predictor’s output using techniques such as sigmoid calibration for binary classification tasks (Cordella et al. 2014; Brinkrolf and Hammer 2017)
P(Y = 1|X =x)≈ 1
1 + exp(Ah(x) +B),
with parameters A and B learned during the training (Brinkrolf and Hammer
2018), softmax transformation for multi-class classification tasks (Kwok 1999)
P(Y =k|X =x)≈ exp (hk(x))P
j∈Y exp (hj(x)),

16 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
wherehj(x) is the predictor’s output forx related to classj, or by fitting Gaussian
Processes for regression tasks (Sambu Seo et al. 2000). In case of multiple predictors h1,...,h V , one can also measure the ensemble agreement as the conditional
probability (Glodek et al. 2012; Zhang 2013)
P(Y =k|X =x)≈
PV
v=1 1 [hv(x) =k]
V .
On the other hand, the class conditional density approaches perform novelty
rejection putting (Dubuisson and Masson 1993; D¨ ubuisson et al. 1985)
ch(x) = max
k∈Y
p(X =x|Y =k). (6)
Intuitively, a low density p(X|Y ) expresses that a sample is rare (Condessa et al.
2015b). Common methods to estimate the confidence in Eq. 6 employ generative
predictors that directly measure the data density such as Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs) (Vailaya and Jain 2000). It is also possible to employ heuristic approaches
such as normalizing the class distance between the examplex and itsv−th nearest
neighbor x′ (Conte et al. 2012; Villmann et al. 2015; Fischer et al. 2014b), i.e.
p(X =x|Y =k)≈ d(x,x′)P
{(x∗,y∗)∈D : y∗=k}d(x∗,x′∗)
and computing the proportion of neighbors within a specified radius R (Berlemont
et al. 2015) as
p(X =x|Y =k)≈ |{x′ : d(x,x′)≤R, (x′,y′)∈D,y′ =k}|P
(x′,y′)∈D|{x∗ : d(x′,x∗)≤R, (x∗,y∗)∈D,y∗ =k}|.
The sensitivity analysis line allows only ambiguity rejection, as it measures the robustness of the predictor under perturbation of either (a) its parameters or (b) the
examples (Lewicke et al. 2008; Hellman 1970). Intuitively, slightly perturbing the
predictor’s parameters has major effects on the predictions only for examples that
fall in the proximity of the decision boundary: slight variations of the parameters
yield slight changes in the decision boundary, which, in turn, may end up flipping
the predictions for some examples. Examples of employed perturbations involve
adding some noise to the model’s parameter values (e.g., adding a random sample
from a normal distribution with null mean and small variance to the weights of a
neural network), employing neural networks with a dropout layer (Geifman and
El-Yaniv 2017), or using a Bayesian simulation (Perini et al. 2020b). In the case
of constructing multiple predictors, a common and simple confidence metric is
c{h1,...,hM}(x) = 1− Var{h1(x),...,h M(x)}
where h1,...,h M are the M predictors constructed by perturbing the parameters, and the variance is scaled to be in [0 , 1]. In some cases, one can directly
employ an ensemble of M similar predictors and measure the variance of their
predictions (Fumera and Roli 2004; Jiang et al. 2020).
Alternatively, one can perturb the test example x to be x +ε, where ε is a
random noise such that ∥ε∥ is small. Intuitively, we want a predictor’s output to
remain the same when the example is only slightly perturbed. Thus, the confidence

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 17
metric should reflect the robustness of h (Mena et al. 2020; Denis and Hebiri 2020;
K¨ uhne et al. 2021), such as
ch(x) =P(h(x +ε) =h(x)),
which measures how likely it is that the prediction does not change when the example is perturbed. More generally, we can apply transformations such as rotations
and symmetries to the examples (Chen et al. 2018). Finally, because choosing a
specific value for ε is hard, one can use existing approaches to find each example’s
minimum ε that will alter its predicted label (Devos et al. 2021) and derive a
confidence metric as a function of the training ε.
The property-based methods consist of learning the confidence based on some of
the predictor’s properties, such as using the leaf configurations of a tree ensemble
or the neural network’s weight of specific neurons. This line allows both ambiguity
and novelty rejection, depending on the utilized property. These methods tend to
exploit heuristic and data-driven intuitions and there are no overarching themes
that connect these intuitions. For instance, Devos et al. (2023) present a method
to detect evasion attacks in tree ensembles. By enumerating the leaves of each tree
as oi, they map each example x to the configuration o = (o1,...,o V )∈ NV of the
V activated leaves (one per tree) when passingx as input to the ensemble. In such
output configuration space, they quantify the proximity to the decision boundary
by measuring the Hamming distance between the configurationo of a test example
with ensemble’s prediction y and the closest training example’s configuration o′
with flipped prediction ˆy̸=y:
OC-score(x) = min
o′∈R ˆy
 VX
v=1
1

ov̸=o′
v

!
where Rˆy is the set of training configurations with flipped predictions. One can
derive a confidence metricch by, for instance, min-max normalizing theOC-score.
On the other hand, confidence values can also be derived from the weight vectors of
a Self-Organizing Map (SOM) (Gamelas Sousa et al. 2014b, 2015). Because SOM’s
can approximate the input data density, they approximate p(X = x|Y = k) with
p(w|Y =k,X =x), where w are the weights of the neural network, using standard
statistical techniques, such as the Parzen Windows (Alhoniemi et al. 1999). Moreover, El-Yaniv and Wiener (2011) propose a disbelief principle, which computes
the confidence function by measuring how much the predictor h deteriorates if
retrained with the constraint to predict a specific example x differently (i.e., hx)
ch(x) = 1
R(hx)−R(h),
where R(hx) > R(h) > 0. Finally, the literature presents additional ad-hoc confidence metrics for k-NN and Random Forest (G¨ opfert et al. 2018; Dalitz 2009).
Learning the rejection thresholdτ. Setting an appropriate rejection thresholdτ
is crucial for having an accurate dependent rejector. At a high level, the threshold
is set in three main ways: using domain knowledge, adhering to user-provided
constraints, or tuning it empirically based on some objective function.
In some situations, users possess domain knowledge that enables setting τ to
achieve a desired rejection rateρ (Le Capitaine and Fr´ elicot 2012; Pang et al. 2021).

18 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Setting τ in this situation entails (1) ranking training examples based on their
confidence level, and (2) setting τ such that the desired percentage of predictions
are rejected (Sotgiu et al. 2020), that is, at
PX(ch(x)<τ ) =ρ.
Note that this approach is also used when evaluating the model performance/rejection
trade-off, which needs to measure the model performance for a fixed rejection rate
(see Sec. 3.2) (Ma et al. 2001; Heo et al. 2018; Fumera et al. 2003).
In other cases, users provide knowledge as specific constraints that should be
satisfied (Pietraszek 2005). On the one hand, the user may provide an upper bound
R for the rejection rate and aim to limit the number of rejections. This results
in learning the appropriate τ by minimizing the model misclassification risk while
adhering to the rejection rate constraint (Zhou et al. 2022; Pugnana and Ruggieri
2022, 2023)
τ = arg min
t∈[0,1]
PXY (h(x)̸=y,c h(x)≥t) subject to PX(ch(x)<t )≤ R.
On the other hand, the user may provide an upper bound M for the proportion
of mispredictions, and aim to control the allowable error (Varshney 2011; Sayedi
et al. 2010). Thus, one needs to learn τ by setting up the complementary problem
as before, namely by minimizing the model rejection rate while satisfying the
constraints on error (Li and Sethi 2006; Franc and Prusa 2019; Franc et al. 2021)
τ = arg min
t∈[0,1]
PX(ch(x)<t ) subject to PXY (h(x)̸=y,c h(x)≥t)≤ M.
Moreover, one can generalize this problem by finding the threshold τ such that
the predictor’s misclassification risk at test time is guaranteed to be bounded with
high probability (Geifman and El-Yaniv 2017).
Finally, it is possible to set τ empirically according to some objective function.
The most common approach is to set a single global threshold τ, which makes the
rejection both simple and transparent, yet usually effective (Fukunaga and Kessell
1972). This is the case for Chow’s rule (Chow 1970) which involves learning the
optimal τ by minimizing the risk function that includes the expected error rate
and the rejection rate
τ = arg min
t∈[0,1]


Z
{x∈X : ch(x)≥t}
(1−ch(x))p(x)dx
| {z }
Error rate
+t
Z
{x∈X : ch(x)<t}
p(x)dx
| {z }
Rejection rate

. (7)
However, in real-world scenarios, obtaining complete knowledge of class distributions is challenging, limiting the applicability of Chow’s rule (Shekhar et al. 2019).
Thus, in a binary classification case, Tortorella (2000) proposes to use two rejection
thresholds τ1 and τ2 such that
h(x) =



0 if ch(x)<τ 1;
1 if ch(x)>τ 2;
® if τ1≤ch(x)≤τ2
(8)

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 19
with ch(x) = P(Y = 1|X = x). He proposes to learn τ1, τ2 by optimizing a cost
function that is identical to finding the intersection between the cost function and
the convex hull of the ROC curve
τ1 = arg min
t∈[0,1]
P(Y = 1)(Cf n−Cr)FNR (t) +P(Y = 0)(Ctn−Cr)TNR (t) (9)
τ2 = arg min
t∈[0,1]
P(Y = 1)(Ctp−Cr)TPR (t) +P(Y = 0)(Cf p−Cr)FPR (t) (10)
where Cf n, Cf p, Ctn, and Ctp are the costs for false negatives, false positives,
true negatives, and true positives, while FNR (t), TNR (t), TPR (t) and FPR (t)
are the false negative, false positive, true negative and true positive rates obtained by evaluating the models with the thresholds set to t. This approach is
theoretically equivalent to Chow’s rule under the Bayesian optimality assumption (Santos-Pereira and Pires 2005; Du et al. 2010). However, when estimating
posterior probabilities, Chow’s rule is not suitable, andτ should be learned using a
cost-based approach (Marrocco et al. 2007; Kotropoulos and Arce 2009). Different
approaches have extended Tortorella’s method to address other scenarios (Sansone
et al. 2001), such as stable formulations of ROC curves for small datasets (Jigang
et al. 2006), robust and fast-to-retrain rejections for cost-sensitive situations (Dubos et al. 2016; Fischer et al. 2015b), and tailored solutions for learning metaclassifiers or handling multiple classes (Pietraszek 2007; Cecotti and Vajda 2013).
For tasks requiring a more fine-grained rejection capability, consideringmultiple
local thresholdsτ1,τ 2,... (up to a finite number) may be beneficial (Muzzolini et al.
1998; Kummert et al. 2016; Krawczyk and Cano 2018). Normally, setting local
thresholds requires dividing the feature space intoJ regionsJi and setting a (local)
threshold in each region. For instance, one can design regions and thresholds by
– constructing one region for each class, i.e. Ji ={x∗| y∗ = i}, which means
that the number of regions J equals the number of classes K (Fumera et al.
2000); then, one often finds the local threshold by using for each Ji the same
approach as for global thresholds;
– using the Voronoi-cell decomposition, which requires J prototypes wi to have
Ji ={x∗ | d(x∗,w j)≤ d(x∗,w k)∀k ̸= i}, for i≤ J (Villmann et al. 2015;
Fischer et al. 2015a,b; Fischer and Villmann 2016); then, Fischer et al. (2014a)
present a greedy optimization method to adaptively determine local thresholds
using a heuristic principle;
– setting up an optimization problem that finds the optimal thresholds by assigning different class rejection costs; for instance, in binary classification, Zheng
et al. (2011) proposes to find
τ1,τ 2 = arg min
0≤t1,t2≤1
h
PXY (ch(x)<t 1|y = 0)Cr,0 +PXY (ch(x)<t 2|y = 1)Cr,1
+PXY (m(x)̸=y)Ce
i
whereCr,0 andCr,1 are the costs for rejecting examples from the negative and
positive classes;
– optimizing an objective function that accounts for different user-specified class
misclassification risks M1,..., MK; Lin et al. (2022) treat each class indepen-

20 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
dently, setting
L(tk) = ˆA(tk) +
KX
j
λj( ˆMj− Mj)2
where ˆA(tk) is any ambiguity metric, λj is a penalization term that needs to
be set to high values to penalize high differences between the model’s misclassification risk ˆM and the user-specified target.
Although multiple thresholds give more fine-grained control over a rejector’s performance (Laroui et al. 2021; Gangrade et al. 2021a), this is usually more computationally expensive. However, Fischer et al. (2016) propose efficient schemes for
optimizing local thresholds and show that the computation time can be reduced
to polynomial (Boulegane et al. 2019).
Benefits and drawbacks of a dependent rejector. Designing a dependent rejector has several benefits. First, the interaction between the predictor and rejector
enables both types of rejection, because the rejector learns from the predictor’s
output the regions of the feature space where examples are mispredicted or unlikely
to fall. Second, a dependent rejector can extend an existing predictor (including
black-box) by simply setting a proper threshold on a confidence measure. Third,
it allows the reuse of previously learned models, eliminating the need for costly
retraining (Zou et al. 2011; Tang and Sazonov 2014). Fourth, a confidence-based
rejection could be improved by considering multiple confidence metrics where each
one captures different aspects of the underlying uncertainty (Tax and Duin 2008).
However, this architecture has potential drawbacks as well. First, the quality of the
dependent rejector is highly influenced by the quality of the confidence metric,
which is usually hard to evaluate. Second, typically a dependent rejector does not
affect the predictor’s learning phase. This results in possible sub-optimal predictions of the model with a reject option.
6 Integrated rejector
The integrated rejector combines the rejector and predictor into a single model
where it is impossible to distinguish between the role of the h and the r. Formally,
the model with integrated reject option acts as
m(x)∈Y∪{ ®}. (11)
Conceptually, this model simply includes ® as an additional output.
This architecture usually needs a unique algorithm for learning predictor and
rejector in tandem (Cortes et al. 2016a,b). There are two distinct approaches to
learning an integrated rejector. The first approach is model-agnostic and involves
designing an objective function that penalizes (mis)predictions as well as rejections. The second approach is model-specific and entails integrating a rejector into
an existing predictor, where rejection becomes part of the decision-making process.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 21
Learning a model-agnostic integrated rejector. Typically, learning a model
that simultaneously makes accurate predictions and rejects the examples that will
be otherwise mispredicted can be done by simply designing a specialized objective
function (Mozannar and Sontag 2020). Then, such a function can be minimized
using potentially any existing optimizer, which makes it model-agnostic. For instance, for classification, a simple cost-based objective for any hypothesis m can
be expressed as
L = Ep(X,Y )

Cr1 m(x)=®(x) + 1 m(x)̸∈{y,®}(x)
with Cr∈ (0, 1/2]. For tasks other than classification, ad-hoc loss functions are
used, such as those for multilabel classification (Pillai et al. 2013; Nguyen and
H¨ ullermeier 2020, 2021), regression (Asif and Minhas 2020; Kalai and Kanade
2021), online learning (Cortes et al. 2018; Kocak et al. 2020), and multi-instance
learning (Zhang and Metaxas 2006). However, in many cases, surrogate losses are
employed to enable efficient optimization, as learning from discrete losses is computationally impractical (Wegkamp 2007; Grandvalet et al. 2009; Cao et al. 2022).
Consequently, the original loss L is converted into a convex loss by utilizing surrogate functions ψ : R→ R, such as the logistic and hinge functions (Ramaswamy
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Bartlett and Wegkamp 2008):
Logistic: ψ(L) = 1
1 + exp(L), Hinge: ψ(L) =



1− 1−Cr
Cr
L if L< 0
1−L if 0≤L< 1
0 otherwise
For the hinge loss to be convex, it is required that Cr ≤ 1/2 which is the case
for classification as otherwise the cost of rejection would be higher than the cost
of random guessing. Numerous studies in the literature have explored the properties of surrogate loss functions (Yuan and Wegkamp 2010), including calibration
effects (Ni et al. 2019; Charoenphakdee et al. 2021), estimates of bounds for misclassification risk (Shekhar et al. 2019; Kato et al. 2020), penalization effects in
high-dimensional spaces (Wegkamp and Yuan 2012), proximity to the optimal
Bayes solution (Bounsiar et al. 2008; Shen et al. 2020a), and convergence rate
analysis (Denis and Hebiri 2020).
Lastly, one can allocate an extra class K + 1 (commonly known as the reject
class) for rejection and assign a specific penalization cost Cr for predicting such
a class. With this setting, there are two main alternatives. In the first case, there
are no actual examples belonging to this class. Thus, these approaches design loss
functions to enable the classifier to assign on its own a positive score to ambiguous
examples (Huang et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2022). For instance, Ziyin et al. (2019)
propose to measure the expected loss as
L = Ep(X,Y )

log(sk(x) + 1
Cr
sK+1(x))

,
where sk(x) and sK+1(x) are probabilities, respectively, for the class y = k and
K + 1 (rejection). At a high level, decreasing the rejection cost Cr results in
higher chances of rejection. In the second case, one artificially generates examples xn+1,...,x N (e.g., adversarial examples) and assigns them to the rejection

22 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Fig. 8: Two cases of Integrated SVMs: (a) on the left side, the two hyperplanes are
parallel and equidistant to the decision boundary (dashed line); (b) on the right
side, each SVM gives higher priority to one class by limiting mispredictions.
class K + 1. By training a predictor with K + 1 classes, the reject option is naturally incorporated as output, and any (multi-class) predictor can be used for
novelty (Vasconcelos et al. 1995; Singh and Markou 2004; Urahama and Furukawa
1995) or ambiguity rejection (Thulasidasan et al. 2019; Pang et al. 2022).
Learning a model-specific integrated rejector. In many practical use cases,
one may already know that a specific class of models works well within the given
context, such as SVM models in medical applications (Hanczar and Dougherty
2008; Hamid et al. 2017). Given a specific predictor, its learning algorithm can be
slightly adapted to include the reject option. For instance, integrated SVMs set two
(or more) hyperplanes on the feature space and reject all the examples located in
between them (Pillai et al. 2011; Lin et al. 2018; Zidelmal et al. 2012). Figure 8
shows two common cases to learn the hyperplanes. First, one can parametrize the
hyperplane asw·x+b±ε = 0, withε≥ 0, which results in parallel and equidistant
hyperplanes from the decision boundary, where ε indicates the distance (Fumera
and Roli 2002). Learning such hyperplanes requires minimizing the empirical loss
L = 1
2w·w +C
nX
i=1
l(ξi,ε )−
nX
i=1
αi [yi(w·xi +b)− 1 +ξi]
where w is the weight vector, b is the intercept of the hyperplane, C is a (large)
hyperparameter that regulates the importance of the performance/rejection tradeoff expressed inside the function l(ξi,ε ), and αi are the Lagrangian multipliers.
Second, the two hyperplanes can be parametrized as
w′·x +b′ = 0 and w′′·x +b′′ = 0.
By formulating two distinct optimization problems, one can learn the parameters of these hyperplanes. In this approach, one hyperplane is highly penalized for
mispredicting the positive class, while the other one is for the negative class. Essentially, this technique yields two SVMs that have few mispredictions on either class,
and examples falling in between the hyperplanes can be naturally rejected (Varshney 2006). With the same approach, one can also learn a OCSVM for each class to
reject test examples that lie outside any learned hypersphere (novelty) or within
two overlapping hyperspheres (ambiguity) (Lotte et al. 2008; Loeffel et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2007). Finally, Gamelas Sousa et al. (2014a) shows that limiting the
number of support vectors reduces the computational cost, while still ensuring
high performance in most cases.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 23
However, in several cases, more than two SVMs are used. For instance, in
multi-label classification one can exploit as many SVMs as the number of labels
and fit each hyperplane to discriminate between one class and all the others (Pillai
et al. 2011). This raises the issue of defining rejection in the regions of intersection
between some, but not all, of the hyperplanes. To address this, a natural solution
is to utilize a data-replication method (Gamelas Sousa et al. 2009). This approach
involves replicating the complete dataset for each class k∈Y , adding a new dimensionz with the class number, changing the target variable of each replica to a
discrete one-vs-all label, and discriminating classk from the other classes (Cardoso
and Pinto Da Costa 2007; da Rocha Neto et al. 2011).
Finally, Neural Network models allow integrating the rejector and predictor into
the same structure by modifying their output layers (Gangrade et al. 2021b; Ziyin
et al. 2019). Geifman and El-Yaniv (2019) propose to introduce an additional
head mr into the network that is dedicated to rejection. Specifically, mr is set as
a sigmoid function and used such that
m(x) = ® if mr(x)< 0.5.
Similar to the SVM case, Gasca A. et al. (2011) and Mesquita et al. (2016) measure
the disagreement of two Neural Networks trained to prioritize the classes differently. Specifically, they assume a binary classification task and use the output of
two neural networks h1, h2 to predict the positive class if h1(x),h 2(x)≥ 0, the
negative class if h1(x),h 2(x) < 0 and rejection if they disagree on the sign. For
this task, they use two weighted Extreme Learning Machines (wELM) (Zong et al.
2013), namely two neural networks with Q hidden neurons that output
h∗(x) =
QX
q=1
wyβqg(aq·x +bq)
where wy is the cost related to the example x that belongs to the class y, aq is
the weight vector connecting the q-th hidden node and the input nodes, bq is the
bias of the q-th hidden node and g is the activation function. By setting the class
misprediction costs, learning the parameters β = (β1,...,β Q) requires using the
traditional weighted least square formulation min∥Hβ−Y∥2 so that
β = (H TWH )−1H TWY
where H is the n×Q matrix of activation functions hiq =g(aq·xi +bq), W is the
n×1 matrix of class costs (one per example) andY is the target vector. Thus, each
network limits one class mispredictions and the region of disagreement is designed
to be the rejection region.
Benefits and drawbacks of an integrated rejector. This architecture has two
key benefits. First, integrating the predictor and rejector means that both aspects
of the model are optimized toward the task at hand. This can improve the performance of the model with rejection when compared to using other architectures
because the predictor’s and the rejector’s components can affect each other. Second, because it is a unique model, the bias introduced by the model with rejection
is potentially less than in the scenario where the predictor and rejector are two
different models. However, this architecture has potential drawbacks, as designing

24 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
such a rejector might not be trivial. First, it requires extensive knowledge about
the predictor in order to integrate the reject option. Second, it may require developing a novel algorithm to learn the model with a reject option from data.
Finally, it is computationally more expensive than the other architectures, as any
changes to the rejector require retraining the entire model, which can be timeconsuming (Clertant et al. 2020; Shpakova and Sokolovska 2021).
7 Combining multiple rejectors
Most rejectors are tailored towards a single rejection type. However, by combining multiple rejectors one can enable multiple rejections, such as performing both
ambiguity and novelty rejection. We distinguish between two types of combinations of rejectors based on whether the rejectors’ rejection regions overlap or not
because examples in overlapping regions require deeper analysis (e.g., to specify
the underlying rejection type).
First, when rejectors do not overlap (or when we are not interested in the
example’s rejection type), one can simply combine the rejection sets by a logical
or-rule: reject the example if any of the rejectors rejects it and assign such rejection type (Fr´ elicot 1997; Suutala et al. 2004). For instance, given Z rejectors
r1,r 2,...,r Z with thresholds τ1,τ 2,...,τ Z, one can combine them into m as
m(x) =
(
® if∃i≤Z : ri(x;h)<τ i
h(x) otherwise
Second, when rejectors overlap in some regions a simple or-rule can be insufficient to determine the reason for rejection because each rejector may decide to
abstain for a different reason. Typically, existing works carefully select the order to
evaluate the rejectors. This is usually done in a multi-step architecture: either by
stacking only the rejectors (Fr´ elicot 1998; Fr´ elicot and Mascarilla 2002), or even
using multiple models with rejection (Pudil et al. 1992; Barandas et al. 2022).
For instance, givenZ rejectorsr1,r 2,...,r Z with thresholds τ1,τ 2,...,τ Z, one can
order rejectors by importance and combine them as
m(x) =



®1 if r1(x;h)<τ 1;
®2 if r1(x;h)≥τ1 and r2(x;h)<τ 2;
...
h(x) if ri(x;h)≥τi∀i≤Z ;
where ®i indicates the rejector ri’s type of rejection.
8 Applications of machine learning models with rejection
In safety-sensitive domains, making the wrong decision can have serious consequences such as fatal accidents with self-driving cars, major breakdowns in industrial settings or incorrect diagnoses in medical applications. In these domains,
rejection can be used to make cautious predictions. However, the number of papers
discussing machine learning with rejection in practical applications is still limited.
In this section, an overview of these papers is given.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 25
Biomedical applications. Machine learning with rejection is primarily explored in
medical applications due to the potential consequences of incorrect decisions (Liu
et al. 2022). The main focus is on ambiguity rejection for medical diagnosing,
specifically the detection and classification of diseases. If the model is confident
enough, the detection results are automatically translated into a diagnosis. Otherwise, a medical expert verifies the detection (Kompa et al. 2021). For instance,
vocal pathologies are detected using voice recording data, where a linear classifier is trained and uncertain predictions are rejected based on a threshold of the
derived posterior probability (Kotropoulos and Arce 2009). Spine disease diagnosis employs the data-replication method, which predicts only when two biased
classifiers agree (Gamelas Sousa et al. 2009). Cancer detection, particularly breast
tumor detection, benefits from a reject option implemented with an SVM classifier
using confidence-based rejection (Guan et al. 2020). The rejection thresholds are
chosen to limit the rejection rate and reduce manual effort.
Other biomedical applications have also adopted the use of a reject option.
Lotte et al. (2008) conduct an experiment on distinguishing hand movements using
brain activity. They employ a separate novelty rejector trained in a supervised
manner to discard brain activity associated with other activities. Lewicke et al.
(2008) explore sleep stage scoring with both types of rejection, utilizing confidence
metrics derived from a Neural Network classifier’s neural activities. Another sleep
stage scoring application utilizes a separate rejector based on Local Outlier Factor
(LOF) anomaly scores for novelty rejection, identifying patients who deviate from
the training data (Van der Plas et al. 2021). Some papers compare the performance
of multiple models with rejection to determine the optimal approach for specific
biomedical applications. For instance, Kang et al. (2017) predict the effectiveness of
a diabetes drug for individual patients, while Tang and Sazonov (2014) investigate
the classification of body positions using sensors placed in patients’ shoes. Lastly,
a medical application focuses on the analysis of tissue examples, aiming to classify
each pixel of tissue images into categories such as bone, fat, or muscle (Condessa
et al. 2013, 2015a).
Engineering applications. Applications in engineering can also benefit from a reject
option. For instance, in the chemical identification of gases, time-series data is
processed by two classifiers to classify the observed gas. Classification occurs only
when there is agreement between the classifiers, and ambiguous predictions are
rejected until consensus is reached (Hatami and Chira 2013). A similar ambiguity
rejection technique, rejecting when two classifiers disagree, is employed in defect
detection in software applications (Mesquita et al. 2016). Fault detection in steam
generators utilizes a set of one against all SVM classifiers, and rejection is based on
the distance to the decision boundary of these classifiers, allowing for both rejection
types (Zou et al. 2011). Finally, Hendrickx et al. (2022) employs a separated novelty
rejector for vehicle usage profiling.
Economics applications. In the domain of economics, two applications of machine
learning with rejection have been proposed, both focused on ambiguity rejection
and novelty rejection. The first application uses a Learning Vector Quantization
(LVQ) to classify dollar bills by value (Ahmadi et al. 2004). Confidence metrics
are obtained from the classifier for both types of rejection. The second application

26 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
investigates a few rejection techniques on top of a predictor to decide whether to
grant a loan (Coenen et al. 2020)
Image recognition applications. Reject options are usually available for analyzing
text styles and reading handwritten numbers (Fumera and Roli 2004), used for
both ambiguity rejection (Xu et al. 1992; Huang and Suen 1995; Rahman and
Fairhurst 1998) and novelty rejection (Lou et al. 1999; Arlandis et al. 2002). These
methods employ a confidence-based dependent rejector. Additionally, there is a
paper focused on identifying walkers based on their footprints (Suutala et al.
2004). Initially, each footprint is individually predicted or rejected, and then the
information from three consecutive footprints is combined for the final decision.
9 Link to other research areas
This section briefly discusses the fields related to learning with rejection.
9.1 Uncertainty quantification
The field of uncertainty quantification (UQ) aims to measure how uncertain a
learned model’s predictions are (Gal et al. 2017). It distinguishes between two
types of uncertainties: aleatoric uncertainty, which is the randomness in the data,
and epistemic uncertainty, which is the lack of knowledge. Aleatoric uncertainty
arises from non-deterministic relations between features and the target, while epistemic uncertainty can be caused by a small training set or incorrect model bias.
For instance, when predicting the outcome of tossing an unfair coin, initially we
lack historical data, resulting in high data-epistemic uncertainty. As we observe
more coin tosses, data-epistemic uncertainty decreases, but aleatoric uncertainty
remains due to the stochastic nature of the coin flip (Senge et al. 2014).
These uncertainties are inherently related to rejection. Rejecting examples due
to high aleatoric uncertainty falls into the ambiguity rejection scenario. On the
other hand, high epistemic uncertainty due to the lack of data may cause either
ambiguity or novelty rejection. That is, if an example is similar to the training
set but its prediction strongly depends on the choice of the dataset (e.g., close
to the predictor’s decision boundary for classification tasks), then this gives rise
to an ambiguity rejection. Alternatively, if an example is dissimilar to any of the
training examples, this leads to a novelty rejection.
Methods for UQ can be applied within learning with rejection. UQ focuses
on obtaining (calibrated) estimates that meaningfully convey the level of uncertainty (Kotelevskii et al. 2022), which learning with rejection can leverage to allow the model to abstain when the uncertainty is high (Perello-Nieto et al. 2017;
Kompa et al. 2021). While calibrated uncertainty estimates are not always necessary for learning with rejection, they can be important. For instance, calibrated
uncertainty estimates enable setting an optimal threshold that minimizes the empirical risks (Chow 1970).

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 27
9.2 Anomaly detection
Anomaly detection (Prasad et al. 2009) is a Data Mining task aimed at identifying
examples that deviate from expected behavior in a dataset. It is closely linked to
novelty rejection because anomalies, being rare and substantially different from the
training data, fall under the category of novelties (Ulmer and Cin` a 2020; Pimentel
et al. 2014; Markou and Singh 2003). Anomaly detectors are often utilized for
novelty rejection within a separate rejector architecture.
Adding a reject option to anomaly detectors allows them to abstain from processing examples when a clear decision cannot be made (Perini et al. 2020b, 2023).
However, enabling this option in unsupervised anomaly detection poses two challenges. First, most confidence metrics assume a supervised setting, relying on measuring the distance to a decision surface. However, in anomaly detection, a hard
decision surface may not always exist, necessitating specialized metrics that consider the model bias of the detector (Perini et al. 2020b). Second, the lack of labeled
data makes it difficult to train a rejector using standard performance metrics. Instead, unsupervised techniques are employed, leveraging performance metrics that
measure the stability of the anomaly detector itself (Perini et al. 2020a).
9.3 Active learning
Active learning (Settles 2009; Fu et al. 2013; Zhang and Chaudhuri 2014; Nguyen
et al. 2019) involves the interaction between a learning algorithm and an oracle
who provides feedback to guide the learner. Its purpose is to reduce the need for
labeling large amounts of data while still achieving high predictive performance.
The algorithms focus on identifying the examples that would be most beneficial
for the learner to label, thus minimizing the associated labeling costs.
Active learning and learning with rejection share the focus on uncertain examples (Amin et al. 2021). However, they differ in their motivations for addressing
uncertainty. In active learning, uncertainty is crucial during training to improve efficiency by minimizing the amount of labeled data required for an accurate model.
In contrast, learning with rejection aims to capture uncertainty at test time to
prevent mispredictions. Its focus is on avoiding unreliable predictions based on
uncertain examples.
Another difference is that outliers are not always considered. For instance,
methods based on discriminative learning cannot express low-density regions.
Sharma and Bilgic (2017) determine uncertain examples based on evidence measures that support the positive ( E+1) or negative class ( E−1) in binary classification. An example x has an uncertain class if E+1(x)≈ E−1(x). Two cases are
distinguished based on the magnitude of the evidence: if both E+1 and E−1 are
large, the model is uncertain because of strong, but conflicting evidence for both
classes, while if both E+1 and E−1 are small, the model is uncertain because of
insufficient evidence for either class. Because both cases assume that a model is
uncertain if P(Y|X)≈ 0.5 when using a uniform prior, they both correspond to
our ambiguity rejection scenario.
Combining active learning with machine learning with rejection could be of
great use (Korycki et al. 2019; Puchkin and Zhivotovskiy 2022; Shekhar et al.
2020). When the interaction with an oracle is possible, it may be of interest to

28 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
query the rejected test examples. New data types could be identified by novelty
rejection, while ambiguity rejection may fine-tune the decision boundary.
9.4 Class-incremental / incomplete learning
Typically, learned models assume knowledge of all possible classes during training.
However, class-incremental learning focuses on models that adapt during deployment to detect and predict novel classes that were not seen during training.
Novelty rejection and class-incremental learning both operate under an openworld assumption and aim to detect novel examples compared to the training set.
However, there are two key differences. First, class-incremental learning specifically
targets examples belonging to novel classes, distinguishing them from outliers. In
contrast, novelty rejection techniques do not prioritize this distinction. Second,
class-incremental learning involves detecting novel class examples and retraining
the model to recognize them.
Novelty rejection techniques can be considered in class-incremental learning.
Moreover, both techniques can be combined into a single pipeline, by adapting
incremental models with novelty rejected examples. For instance, such examples
can be used as prototypes in a k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) model.
9.5 Delegating classifiers
Similar to learning with rejection, the approach of delegation involves the use of
a classifier, which only classifies examples with high confidence and delegates the
prediction for the remaining examples (Temanni and Nadeem 2007; Khodra 2016).
The delegated examples are given to another, more specialized, classifier which
makes a prediction (Ferri et al. 2004; Prasad and Sowmya 2008). In contrast,
learning with rejection usually assumes that the user will inspect any rejected
examples. Furthermore, delegation can be developed as a chain, where the next
classifier makes a prediction for the examples for which the previous model was
too uncertain (Giraud-Carrier 2022).
9.6 Meta-learning
Meta-learning, also known as “learning to learn”, explores methods and techniques for automatically learning the characteristics, behaviors, and performance
of machine learning models (Bock 1988; Vanschoren 2018). It aims to develop
higher-level knowledge that guides the learning process itself (Brazdil et al. 2009;
Gridin 2022).
Despite having different goals and levels of abstraction, meta-learning can provide valuable insights and approaches for the context of learning with rejection.
For instance, meta-learning algorithms analyze the behavior and performance of
classifiers on different datasets to derive general knowledge about their strengths,
weaknesses, and limitations (Abbasi et al. 2012; Tremmel et al. 2022; Cohen et al.
2022). This knowledge can then be used to make informed decisions about when
to reject predictions. Moreover, meta-learning algorithms can identify relevant

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 29
features or attributes that are informative for determining when to reject predictions (Filchenkov and Pendryak 2016; Shen et al. 2020b). By focusing on important
features, rejectors can make more accurate decisions.
10 Conclusions and perspectives
We have studied the subfield of machine learning with rejection and provided a
higher-level overview of existing research. To conclude, we revisit our key research
questions and point to new directions that future research might take.
10.1 Research questions revisited
This survey paper is built around eight key research questions, introduced in the
introduction. In this section, we revisit each of these questions and briefly summarize our findings.
How can we formalize the conditions for which a model should abstain from making a
prediction? In Section 2, we identify two types of rejections: ambiguity rejection
and novelty rejection. Ambiguity rejection abstains from making a prediction an
example falls in a region where the target value is ambiguous (e.g., close to the
decision boundary in classification tasks). This could be due to a non-deterministic
true relation between the features and target variable, or due to a hypothesis space
that is not able to capture the true relation. Novelty rejection abstains from making
a prediction on examples that are rare with respect to the given training set. For
such an example, there is no guarantee that the model correctly extrapolates to
this untrained region, making it likely that the model mispredicts the example.
How can we evaluate the performance of a model with rejection? Standard machine
learning evaluation is focused on a model’s predictive quality. However, in machine
learning with rejection, there exists a trade-off between the predictive quality and
the proportion of rejected examples.
In Section 3, we provide an overview of techniques evaluating both the prediction and rejection quality of models with rejection. We identify three categories:
metrics evaluating models with a given rejection rate, metrics evaluating the overall model performance/rejection trade-off, and metrics evaluating models through
a cost function.
What architectures are possible for operationalizing (i.e., putting this into practice)
the ability to abstain from making a prediction? We categorize machine learning
methodologies with rejection in three different architectures, depending on the
relationship between the predictor and the rejector: separated, dependent and
integrated rejector. These categories are introduced and mapped to the existing
literature in Sections 4, 5 and 6.

30 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
How do we learn models with rejection? For each architecture, we discuss the main
techniques to learn a model with rejection and related these to the existing literature in Sections 4, 5 and 6. First, the separated rejector is usually learned independently of the predictor. Second, learning the dependent rejector entails learning for
which examples the predictor is likely to mispredict using a confidence function.
Both architectures need setting a rejection threshold. Third, integrated rejector
needs a unique algorithm for learning predictor and rejector in tandem. Usually,
this architecture relies on designing an objective function.
What are the main pros and cons of using a specific architecture? Each architecture,
discussed in Sections 4,5, and 6, offers distinct benefits and drawbacks. Separated
rejectors show broad applicability, as they can be combined with any predictor.
However, they often yield sub-optimal rejection performance since they do not
learn from the predictor’s mispredictions. On the other hand, dependent rejectors
have reduced, yet still high, applicability, relying on a specific confidence function
learned from the predictor’s output, but they can enhance the rejection quality by
leveraging the predictor’s mispredictions. Finally, integrated rejectors necessitate
joint design with the predictor, but learning a single model for prediction and
rejection improves the overall performance for both prediction and rejection tasks.
How can we combine multiple rejectors? We discuss the combination of multiple
rejectors for enabling various types of rejections within a unique model. There
are two approaches for combining rejectors. First, when rejectors do not overlap,
a logical “or” rule is applied, rejecting an example if any of the rejectors rejects
it. Second, when rejectors overlap in some regions and disagree on the type of
rejection, a multi-step architecture is used, ordering rejectors by importance to
make decisions based on the most relevant rejector.
Where does the need for machine learning with rejection methods arise in real-world
applications? On a high level, machine learning with rejection is typically used in
applications where incorrect decisions can have severe consequences, both financially and safety-related. These consequences motivate the need for robust and
trustworthy machine learning. In Section 8, we provide an overview of application
areas in which machine learning with rejection is already used.
How does machine learning with rejection relate to other research areas? Section 9
shows that machine learning with rejection is closely related to several other subfields of machine learning. This relation sometimes leads to terminology and techniques overlapping or inspired by these other domains. In contrast, other cases
show machine learning with rejection from a broader perspective. In this survey,
we related machine learning with rejection to uncertainty quantification, anomaly
detection, active learning, class-incremental learning, delegating classifiers, and
meta-learning.
10.2 Future directions
Given its significance for the usage of machine learning in real-world problems
and the growing attention for trustworthy AI, we expect machine learning with

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 31
rejection to remain an active research field. In this section, we briefly discuss three
key research directions for which we see a strong need.
Standard settings to compare different models with rejection. A large number of machine learning models with rejection already exist. However, these are typically
evaluated on custom or even proprietary data. This makes it difficult to benchmark
and compare the different approaches. While some papers use publicly available
datasets, there is no standard benchmark set for machine learning with rejection.
Additionally, applying multiple strategies to evaluate the rejector offers a better
view of an algorithm’s performance and improves comparability.
Partial rejection for machine learning models. A promising avenue for further exploration is the concept of partial abstention. Nowadays, machine learning problems
often involve seeking elaborated predictions rather than simple scalar or class
values as in classification and regression tasks. For instance, in multi-label classification, a prediction for an instance is a subset of possible class labels. In such
cases, the idea of abstaining from a complete prediction can be extended to partial abstention, where the learner delivers predictions on some but not necessarily
all class labels, according to its level of certainty (Nguyen and H¨ ullermeier 2020).
This has the key benefit of providing a middle ground between making predictions
for the entire structure and completely abstaining from making any predictions.
Algorithms enabling models with rejection in domains other than classification. Most
papers on machine learning with rejection study supervised classification problems. Modern machine learning tackles numerous other tasks such as regression,
forecasting, and clustering, or even semi-supervised and self-supervised feedback
loops. We believe that the rejection can also be of use in such areas. However,
since only a handful of relevant studies exist, this requires more attention from
the research community. Future research can also focus on integrating rejectionrelated variables into statistical frameworks utilized in educational measurement,
such as Item Response Theory (IRT). This integration has the potential to improve
the precision of item calibration, trait estimation, and the interpretation of test
scores. Furthermore, it can provide valuable insights into the psychological aspects
of learning, enabling the development of more precise instructional strategies and
interventions.
Declarations
Funding
Kilian Hendrickx and Dries Van der Plas received funding from VLAIO (Flemish
Innovation & Entrepreneurship) through the Baekeland PhD mandates [HBC.2017.0226]
(KH) and [HBC.2019.2615] (DV). Lorenzo Perini received funding from FWO-
Vlaanderen, aspirant grant 1166222N. Jesse Davis is partially supported by the
KU Leuven research funds [C14/17/070]. Lorenzo Perini, Jesse Davis and Wannes
Meert received funding from the Flemish Government under the “Onderzoeksprogramma Artifici¨ ele Intelligentie (AI) Vlaanderen” programme.

32 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Ethics approval
Not applicable
Consent to participate
Not applicable
Availability of data and material
Not applicable
Code availability
Not applicable
Authors’ contributions
Concept: JD, WM; Literature Study: KH, LP, DVdP; Categorization: KH, LP,
DVdP, WM, JD; Writing - original draft preparation: KH, LP, DVdP; Writing -
review and editing: WM, JD; Writing - revision: LP, WM, JD, DVdP, KH; Funding
acquisition: WM, JD; Supervision: WM, JD.
References
Abbas, M. R., Nadeem, M. S. A., Shaheen, A., Alshdadi, A. A., Alharbey, R., Shim, S.-O.,
and Aziz, W. (2019). Accuracy Rejection Normalized-Cost Curves (ARNCCs): A Novel
3-Dimensional Framework for Robust Classification. IEEE Access, 7:160125–160143.
Abbasi, A., Albrecht, C., Vance, A., and Hansen, J. (2012). Metafraud: A meta-learning
framework for detecting financial fraud. MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems, 36(4):1293–1327.
Ahmadi, A., Omatu, S., Fujinaka, T., and Kosaka, T. (2004). Improvement of reliability in
banknote classification using reject option and local PCA. Information Sciences, 168(1-
4):277–293.
Alhoniemi, E., Himberg, J., and Vesanto, J. (1999). Probabilistic measures for responses
of self-organizing map units. In H. Bothe and E. Oja and E. Massad and C. Haefke,
editor, Proceedings of the International ICSC Congress on Computational Intelligence
Methods and Applications. ICSC Academic Press, Zurich, Switzerland , pages 286–290.
ICSC Academic Press.
Amin, K., DeSalvo, G., and Rostamizadeh, A. (2021). Learning with Labeling Induced Abstentions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 15(NeurIPS):12576–12586.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 33
Arlandis, J., Perez-Cortes, J. C., and Cano, J. (2002). Rejection strategies and confidence
measures for a k-NN classifier in an OCR task. In International Conference on Pattern
Recognition, volume 16, pages 576–579.
Asif, A. and Minhas, F. u. A. A. (2020). Generalized Neural Framework for Learning with
Rejection. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages
1–8. IEEE.
Balsubramani, A. (2016). Learning to Abstain from Binary Prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.08151, pages 1–23.
Barandas, M., Folgado, D., Santos, R., Sim˜ ao, R., and Gamboa, H. (2022). Uncertainty-Based
Rejection in Machine Learning: Implications for Model Development and Interpretability.
Electronics (Switzerland), 11(3):1–20.
Bartlett, P. L. and Wegkamp, M. H. (2008). Classification with a reject option using a hinge
loss. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9:1823–1840.
Berlemont, S., Lefebvre, G., Duffner, S., and Garcia, C. (2015). Siamese neural network
based similarity metric for inertial gesture classification and rejection. In 2015 11th IEEE
International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
(FG), pages 1–6. IEEE.
Bock, P. (1988). A perspective on artificial intelligence: Learning to learn.Annals of Operations
Research, 16(1):33–52.
Boulegane, D., Bifet, A., and Madhusudan, G. (2019). Arbitrated Dynamic Ensemble with
Abstaining for Time-Series Forecasting on Data Streams. In 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , pages 1040–1045. IEEE.
Bounsiar, A., Beauseroy, P., and Grall-Ma¨ es, E. (2008). General solution and learning
method for binary classification with performance constraints. Pattern Recognition Letters, 29(10):1455–1465.
Brazdil, P., Carrier, C. G., Soares, C., and Vilalta, R. (2009). Metalearning - Applications to
Data Mining. Springer Science & Business Media.
Brinkrolf, J. and Hammer, B. (2017). Probabilistic extension and reject options for pairwise
LVQ. In 2017 12th International Workshop on Self-Organizing Maps and Learning Vector
Quantization, Clustering and Data Visualization (WSOM) , pages 1–8. IEEE.
Brinkrolf, J. and Hammer, B. (2018). Interpretable machine learning with reject option. Automatisierungstechnik, 66(4):283–290.
Cao, Y., Cai, T., and An, B. (2022). Generalizing Consistent Multi-Class Classification with
Rejection to be Compatible with Arbitrary Losses. (NeurIPS):1–14.
Cardoso, J. S. and Pinto Da Costa, J. F. (2007). Learning to classify ordinal data: The data
replication method. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 8:1393–1429.
Cecotti, H. and Vajda, S. (2013). Rejection Schemes in Multi-class Classification – Application to Handwritten Character Recognition. In 2013 12th International Conference on
Document Analysis and Recognition, pages 445–449. IEEE.
Charoenphakdee, N., Cui, Z., Zhang, Y., and Sugiyama, M. (2021). Classification with Rejection Based on Cost-sensitive Classification. In Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1507–1517.
Chen, B., Chen, B. F., and Lin, H. T. (2018). Rotation-blended CNNs on a new open dataset
for tropical cyclone image-to-intensity regression. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 90–99.
Chow, C. (1970). On optimum recognition error and reject tradeoff. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 16(1):41–46.
Clertant, M., Sokolovska, N., Chevaleyre, Y., and Hanczar, B. (2020). Interpretable cascade
classifiers with abstention. AISTATS 2019 - 22nd International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics .
Coenen, L., Abdullah, A. K., and Guns, T. (2020). Probability of default estimation, with a
reject option. In 2020 IEEE 7th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced
Analytics (DSAA), pages 439–448. IEEE.
Cohen, K. M., Park, S., Simeone, O., and Shamai, S. (2022). Bayesian Active Meta-Learning for
Reliable and Efficient AI-Based Demodulation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
70:5366–5380.
Condessa, F., Bioucas-Dias, J., Castro, C. A., Ozolek, J., and Kovacevic, J. (2013). Classification with reject option using contextual information. In 2013 IEEE 10th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging , pages 1340–1343, San Francisco, California. IEEE.

34 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Condessa, F., Bioucas-Dias, J., Castro, C. A., Ozolek, J., and Kovaˇ cevi´ c, J. (2015a).
Image Classification with Rejection using Contextual Information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.01287, pages 1–21.
Condessa, F., Bioucas-Dias, J., and Kovacevic, J. (2015b). Robust hyperspectral image classification with rejection fields. In Workshop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing,
Evolution in Remote Sensing , volume 2015-June, pages 1–4, Tokyo, Japan. IEEE.
Condessa, F., Bioucas-Dias, J., and Kovacevic, J. (2015c). Supervised hyperspectral image
classification with rejection. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , 9(6):2321–2332.
Condessa, F., Bioucas-Dias, J., and Kovaˇ cevi´ c, J. (2017). Performance measures for classification systems with rejection. Pattern Recognition, 63:437–450.
Conte, D., Foggia, P., Percannella, G., Saggese, A., and Vento, M. (2012). An ensemble of
rejecting classifiers for anomaly detection of audio events. In Proceedings - 2012 IEEE 9th
International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal-Based Surveillance, AVSS 2012 ,
pages 76–81. IEEE.
Corbi` ere, C., Thome, N., Saporta, A., Vu, T. H., Cord, M., and P´ erez, P. (2022). Confidence
Estimation via Auxiliary Models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 44(10):6043–6055.
Cordelia, L. P., Foggia, P., Sansone, C., Tortorella, F., and Vento, M. (1998). Optimizing
the error/reject trade-off for a multi-expert system using the Bayesian combining rule.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) , volume 1451, pages 717–725.
Cordella, L., De Stefano, C., Fontanella, F., and Scotto Di Freca, A. S. (2014). Random forest
for reliable pre-classification of handwritten characters. In Proceedings - International
Conference on Pattern Recognition, pages 1319–1324. IEEE.
Cordella, L., De Stefano, C., Sansone, C., and Vento, M. (1995a). An adaptive reject option for
LVQ classifiers. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 974, pages 68–73. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
Cordella, L., De Stefano, C., Tortorella, F., and Vento, M. (1995b). A method for improving
classification reliability of multilayer perceptrons.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
6(5):1140–1147.
Cortes, C., DeSalvo, G., Gentile, C., Mohri, M., and Yang, S. (2018). Online Learning with
Abstention. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1059–1067, Stockholmsm¨ assan, Stockholm Sweden. PMLR.
Cortes, C., DeSalvo, G., and Mohri, M. (2016a). Boosting with abstention. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1668–1676.
Cortes, C., DeSalvo, G., and Mohri, M. (2016b). Learning with Rejection. In Proceedings of
The 27th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT 2016) , volume
9925 LNAI, pages 67–82, Bari, Italy. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
da Rocha Neto, A. R., Sousa, R., Barreto, G. d. A., and Cardoso, J. S. (2011). Diagnostic
of Pathology on the Vertebral Column with Embedded Reject Option. In IbPRIA 2011:
Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis , volume 6669 LNCS, pages 588–595.
Dalitz, C. (2009). Reject options and confidence measures for kNN classifiers. Schriftenreihe
des Fachbereichs Elektrotechnik und Informatik Hochschule Niederrhein , 8(2009):16–38.
De, A., Okati, N., Zarezade, A., and Rodriguez, M. G. (2021). Classification Under Human
Assistance. 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021 , 7:5905–5913.
De Stefano, C., Sansone, C., and Vento, M. (2000). To reject or not to reject: that is the
question-an answer in case of neural classifiers. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) , 30(1):84–94.
Denis, C. and Hebiri, M. (2020). Consistency of plug-in confidence sets for classification in
semi-supervised learning. Journal of Nonparametric Statistics , 32(1):42–72.
Devos, L., Meert, W., and Davis, J. (2021). Versatile Verification of Tree Ensembles. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 139:2654–2664.
Devos, L., Perini, L., Meert, W., and Davis, J. (2023). Detecting Evasion Attacks in Deployed Tree Ensembles. Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases, pages 227–243.
Du, J., Ni, E. A., and Ling, C. X. (2010). Adapting cost-sensitive learning for reject option.
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Proceedings, pages
1865–1868.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 35
Dubos, C., Bernard, S., Adam, S., and Sabourin, R. (2016). ROC-based cost-sensitive classification with a reject option. In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR), pages 3320–3325. IEEE.
Dubuisson, B. and Masson, M. (1993). A statistical decision rule with incomplete knowledge
about classes. Pattern Recognition, 26(1):155–165.
D¨ ubuisson, B., Usai, M., and Malvache, P. (1985). Computer aided system diagnostic with an
incomplete learning set. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 15(C):875–880.
El-Yaniv, R. and Wiener, Y. (2010). On the foundations of noise-free selective classification.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:1605–1641.
El-Yaniv, R. and Wiener, Y. (2011). Agnostic selective classification. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 24:1–9.
Feng, L., Ahmed, M. O., Hajimirsadeghi, H., and Abdi, A. (2022). Towards Better Selective
Classification. In International conference on learning and representation .
Ferri, C., Flach, P., and Hern´ andez-Orallo, J. (2004). Delegating classifiers. Proceedings,
Twenty-First International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2004 , pages 289–
296.
Ferri, C. and Hern´ andez-Orallo, J. (2004). Cautious Classifiers.Proceedings of ROC Analysis
in Artificial Intelligence, 1st International Workshop (ROCAI-2004) , pages 27–36.
Filchenkov, A. and Pendryak, A. (2016). Datasets meta-feature description for recommending
feature selection algorithm. Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language
and Information Extraction, Social Media and Web Search FRUCT Conference, AINL-
ISMW FRUCT 2015 , 7:11–18.
Fischer, L., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2014a). Local Rejection Strategies for Learning
Vector Quantization. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 8681 LNCS, pages
563–570. Springer Cham.
Fischer, L., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2015a). Efficient rejection strategies for prototypebased classification. Neurocomputing, 169:334–342.
Fischer, L., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2015b). Optimum Reject Options for Prototypebased Classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.06549 .
Fischer, L., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2016). Optimal local rejection for classifiers. Neurocomputing, 214:445–457.
Fischer, L., Nebel, D., Villmann, T., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2014b). Rejection Strategies for Learning Vector Quantization – A Comparison of Probabilistic and Deterministic
Approaches. In 22nd European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational
Intelligence and Machine Learning, ESANN 2014 - Proceedings , pages 109–118. Springer
Cham.
Fischer, L. and Villmann, T. (2016). A Probabilistic Classifier Model with Adaptive Rejection
Option. http://www.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/˜fschleif/mlr/mlr.html.
Flores, I. (1958). An Optimum Character Recognition System Using Decision Functions. IRE
Transactions on Electronic Computers, EC-7(2):180.
Franc, V. and Prusa, D. (2019). On discriminative learning of prediction uncertainty. 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019 , 2019-June:3465–3480.
Franc, V., Prusa, D., and Voracek, V. (2021). Optimal strategies for reject option classifiers.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24:1–49.
Fr´ elicot, C. (1997). Learning rejection thresholds for a class of fuzzy classifiers from possibilistic
clustered noisy data. In 7th International Fuzzy Systems Association World Congress,
IFSA, volume 3, pages 111–116.
Fr´ elicot, C. (1998). On unifying probabilistic/fuzzy and possibilistic rejection-based classifiers.
In SSPR /SPR 1998: Advances in Pattern Recognition , pages 736–745. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Fr´ elicot, C. and Mascarilla, L. (2002). Reject strategies driven combination of pattern classifiers. Pattern Analysis and Applications , 5(2):234–243.
Friedel, C. C., R¨ uckert, U., and Kramer, S. (2006). Cost Curves for Abstaining Classifiers. In
ICML 2006 - 3th workshop ROC Analysis in ML , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Fu, Y., Zhu, X., and Li, B. (2013). A survey on instance selection for active learning.Knowledge
and Information Systems , 35(2):249–283.
Fukunaga, K. and Kessell, D. (1972). Application of optimum error-reject functions. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory , 18(6):814–817.
Fumera, G., Pillai, I., and Roli, F. (2003). Classification with reject option in text categorisation systems. In 12th International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing,

36 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
2003.Proceedings., pages 582–587. IEEE Comput. Soc.
Fumera, G., Pillai, I., and Roli, F. (2004). A two-stage classifier with reject option for text categorisation. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 3138, pages 771–779. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
Fumera, G. and Roli, F. (2002). Support Vector Machines with Embedded Reject Option. In
Pattern Recognition with Support Vector Machines , pages 68–82. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Fumera, G. and Roli, F. (2004). Analysis of error-reject trade-off in linearly combined multiple
classifiers. Pattern Recognition, 37(6):1245–1265.
Fumera, G., Roli, F., and Giacinto, G. (2000). Multiple reject thresholds for improving classification reliability. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 1876 LNCS, pages
863–871. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Gal, Y., Hron, J., and Kendall, A. (2017). Concrete Dropout. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pages 3581–3590. Curran Associates, Inc.
Gamelas Sousa, R., da Rocha Neto, A., R.Cardoso, J. S., and Barreto, G. A. (2015). Robust
classification with reject option using the self-organizing map. Neural Computing and
Applications, 26(7):1603–1619.
Gamelas Sousa, R., da Rocha Neto, A. R., Barreto, G. A., Cardoso, J. S., and Coimbra, M. T.
(2014a). Reject option paradigm for the reduction of support vectors. 22nd European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning,
ESANN 2014 - Proceedings, pages 331–336.
Gamelas Sousa, R., da Rocha Neto, A. R., Cardoso, J. S., and Barreto, G. A. (2014b). Classification with Reject Option Using the Self-Organizing Map. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, volume 8681 LNCS, chapter Artificial, pages 105–112. Springer, Cham.
Gamelas Sousa, R., Mora, B., and Cardoso, J. S. (2009). An ordinal data method for the
classification with reject option. 8th International Conference on Machine Learning and
Applications, ICMLA 2009 , 2:746–750.
Gangrade, A., Kag, A., Cutkosky, A., and Saligrama, V. (2021a). Online Selective Classification with Limited Feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
18(NeurIPS):14529–14541.
Gangrade, A., Kag, A., and Saligrama, V. (2021b). Selective Classification via One-Sided
Prediction. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 130, page 22, San Diego, California, USA. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research.
Gasca A., E., Salda˜ na T., S., S´ anchez G., J. S., Vel´ asquez G., V., Rend´ on L., E., Abundez B.,
I. M., Valdovinos R., R. M., and Cruz R., R. (2011). A Rejection Option for the Multilayer
Perceptron Using Hyperplanes. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 6593 LNCS,
pages 51–60. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Geifman, Y. and El-Yaniv, R. (2017). Selective Classification for Deep Neural Networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 4879–4888. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Geifman, Y. and El-Yaniv, R. (2019). SelectiveNet: A Deep Neural Network with an Integrated
Reject Option. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2019) , volume
2019-June, pages 3768–3776.
Giraud-Carrier, C. (2022). Combining Base-Learners into Ensembles . Springer International
Publishing.
Glodek, M., Schels, M., Palm, G., and Schwenker, F. (2012). Multiple classifier combination
using reject options and markov fusion networks. ICMI’12 - Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction , pages 465–472.
Golfarelli, M., Maio, D., and Malton, D. (1997). On the error-reject trade-off in biometric
verification systems. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
19(7):786–796.
G¨ opfert, J. P., Hammer, B., and Wersing, H. (2018). Mitigating concept drift via rejection. In
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 11139 LNCS, pages 456–467. Springer Cham.
Grandvalet, Y., Rakotomamonjy, A., Keshet, J., and Canu, S. (2009). Support Vector Machines
with a Reject Option. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21 , pages
537–544. Curran Associates, Inc.
Gridin, I. (2022). Hyperparameter Optimization.
Guan, H., Zhang, Y., Cheng, H. D., and Tang, X. (2020). Bounded-abstaining classification
for breast tumors in imbalanced ultrasound images. International Journal of Applied

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 37
Mathematics and Computer Science , 30(2):325–336.
Hamid, K., Asif, A., Abbasi, W., Sabih, D., and Afsar, F. A. (2017). Machine Learning with
Abstention for Automated Liver Disease Diagnosis. In 2017 International Conference on
Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT), volume 2017-Janua, pages 356–361. IEEE.
Hanczar, B. (2019). Performance visualization spaces for classification with rejection option.
Pattern Recognition, 96:106984.
Hanczar, B. and Dougherty, E. R. (2008). Classification with reject option in gene expression
data. Bioinformatics, 24(17):1889–1895.
Hanczar, B. and Sebag, M. (2014). Combination of one-class support vector machines for classification with reject option. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases
- Part I , pages 547–562. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Hansen, L. K., Liisberg, C., and Salamon, P. (1997). The Error-Reject Tradeoff. Open Systems
& Information Dynamics , 4(2):159–184.
Hatami, N. and Chira, C. (2013). Classifiers with a reject option for early time-series classification. Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence and
Ensemble Learning, CIEL 2013 - 2013 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, SSCI 2013 , pages 9–16.
Hellman, M. E. (1970). The Nearest Neighbor Classification Rule with a Reject Option. IEEE
Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , 6(3):179–185.
Hendrickx, K., Meert, W., Cornelis, B., and Davis, J. (2022). Know Your Limits: Machine
Learning with Rejection for Vehicle Engineering. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), volume 13087 LNAI, pages 273–288.
Heo, J., Lee, H. B., Kim, S., Lee, J., Kim, K. J., Yang, E., and Hwang, S. J. (2018). Uncertainty-
Aware Attention for Reliable Interpretation and Prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pages 909–918, Montreal, Canada. Curran Associates, Inc.
Herbei, R. and Wegkamp, M. H. (2006). Classification with reject option. Canadian Journal
of Statistics, 34(4):709–721.
Homenda, W., Luckner, M., and Pedrycz, W. (2014). Classification with rejection based on
various SVM techniques. In 2014 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), pages 3480–3487. IEEE.
Homenda, W., Luckner, M., and Pedrycz, W. (2016). Classification with rejection: Concepts
and evaluations. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 364(December):413–425.
Hosseini, H., Chen, Y., Kannan, S., Zhang, B., and Poovendran, R. (2017). Blocking
Transferability of Adversarial Examples in Black-Box Learning Systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.04318.
Hsu, Y. C., Shen, Y., Jin, H., and Kira, Z. (2020). Generalized ODIN: Detecting Out-of-
Distribution Image without Learning from Out-of-Distribution Data. Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
10948–10957.
Huang, L., Zhang, C., and Zhang, H. (2020). Self-adaptive training: Beyond empirical risk minimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020-Decem(NeurIPS):1–
12.
Huang, Y. and Suen, C. (1995). A method of combining multiple experts for the recognition
of unconstrained handwritten numerals. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 17(1):90–94.
Jiang, W., Zhao, Y., and Wang, Z. (2020). Risk-Controlled Selective Prediction for Regression
Deep Neural Network Models. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE.
Jigang, X., Zhengding, Q., and Jie, W. (2006). Bootstrap methods for reject rules of fisher
LDA. Proceedings - International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 3:425–428.
Kalai, A. T. and Kanade, V. (2021). Towards optimally abstaining from prediction with OOD
test examples. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 16(NeurIPS):12774–
12785.
Kang, S., Cho, S., Rhee, S.-j., and Yu, K.-S. (2017). Reliable prediction of anti-diabetic drug
failure using a reject option. Pattern Analysis and Applications , 20(3):883–891.
Kato, M., Cui, Z., and Fukuhara, Y. (2020). ATRO: Adversarial Training with a Rejection
Option. (2019):1–18.

38 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Khodra, M. L. (2016). Delegating Classifiers for Automatic Text Categorization Delegating
Classifiers for Automatic Text Categorization. (June).
Kocak, M. A., Ramirez, D., Erkip, E., and Shasha, D. (2020). SafePredict: A Meta-Algorithm
for Machine Learning That Uses Refusals to Guarantee Correctness. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 43(2):1–1.
Kompa, B., Snoek, J., and Beam, A. L. (2021). Second opinion needed: communicating uncertainty in medical machine learning. npj Digital Medicine , 4(1):4.
Korycki, L., Cano, A., and Krawczyk, B. (2019). Active Learning with Abstaining Classifiers
for Imbalanced Drifting Data Streams. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data) , pages 2334–2343. IEEE.
Kotelevskii, N., Artemenkov, A., Fedyanin, K., Noskov, F., Fishkov, A., Shelmanov, A.,
Vazhentsev, A., Petiushko, A., and Panov, M. (2022). Nonparametric Uncertainty Quantification for Single Deterministic Neural Network. (NeurIPS 2022):1–16.
Kotropoulos, C. and Arce, G. R. (2009). Linear classifier with reject option for the detection
of vocal fold paralysis and vocal fold edema. Eurasip Journal on Advances in Signal
Processing, 2009.
Krawczyk, B. and Cano, A. (2018). Online ensemble learning with abstaining classifiers for
drifting and noisy data streams. Applied Soft Computing , 68:677–692.
K¨ uhne, J., M¨ arz, C., and G¨ uhmann, C. (2021). Securing Deep Learning Models with Autoencoder based Anomaly Detection. In Proceedings of the European Conference of the PHM
Society 2021, pages 221–233, Virtual event. PHM Society.
Kummert, J., Paassen, B., Jensen, J., Gopfert, C., and Hammer, B. (2016). Local reject option
for deterministic multi-class SVM. Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–
ICANN 2016: 25th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Barcelona,
Spain, September 6-9, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 25 , (Springer):251–258.
Kwok, J. T. (1999). Moderating the outputs of support vector machine classifiers. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks , 10(5):1018–1031.
Lam, L. and Suen, C. Y. (1995). Optimal combinations of pattern classifiers. Pattern Recognition Letters, 16(9):945–954.
Landgrebe, T. C., Tax, D. M., Pacl´ ık, P., and Duin, R. P. (2006). The interaction between
classification and reject performance for distance-based reject-option classifiers. Pattern
Recognition Letters, 27(8):908–917.
Landgrebe, T. C., Tax, D. M., Pacl´ ık, P., Duin, R. P., and Andrew, C. (2004). A combining
strategy for ill-defined problems. In Proc. of the 15th Annual Symposium of the Pattern
Recognition Association of South Africa, pages 57–62.
Laroui, S., Descombes, X., Vernay, A., Villiers, F., Debreuve, E., Laroui, S., Descombes, X.,
Vernay, A., Villiers, F., Villalba, F., and Laroui, S. (2021). How to define a rejection
class based on model learning? In 25th International Conference on Pattern Recogniton ,
Milano.
Le Capitaine, H. and Fr´ elicot, C. (2012). A family of measures for best top-n class-selective
decision rules. Pattern Recognition, 45(1):552–562.
Lee, J. K., Bu, Y., Rajan, D., Sattigeri, P., Panda, R., Das, S., and Wornell, G. W. (2021). Fair
Selective Classification Via Sufficiency. Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
on Machine Learning, 139:6076–6086.
Lei, J. (2014). Classification with confidence. Biometrika, 101(4):755–769.
Lewicke, A., Sazonov, E. S., Corwin, M., Neuman, M., and Schuckers, S. (2008). Sleep Versus Wake Classification From Heart Rate Variability Using Computational Intelligence:
Consideration of Rejection in Classification Models. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 55(1):108–118.
Li, M. and Sethi, I. K. (2006). Confidence-based classifier design. Pattern Recognition,
39(7):1230–1240.
Lin, D., Sun, L., Toh, K. A., Zhang, J. B., and Lin, Z. (2018). Twin SVM with a reject option
through ROC curve. Journal of the Franklin Institute , 355(4):1710–1732.
Lin, Z., Glass, L., Westover, M. B., Xiao, C., and Sun, J. (2022). SCRIB: Set-Classifier with
Class-Specific Risk Bounds for Blackbox Models. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 36(7):7497–7505.
Liu, J., Gallego, B., and Barbieri, S. (2022). Incorporating uncertainty in learning to defer
algorithms for safe computer-aided diagnosis. Scientific Reports, 12(1):1–9.
Loeffel, P. X., Marsala, C., and Detyniecki, M. (2015). Classification with a reject option under
Concept Drift: The Droplets algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 39
Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, DSAA 2015 , pages 1–9.
Lotte, F., Mouch` ere, H., and L´ ecuyer, A. (2008). Pattern rejection strategies for the design of
self-paced EEG-based brain-computer interfaces. Proceedings - International Conference
on Pattern Recognition, pages 6–10.
Lou, Z., Liu, K., Yang, J., and Suen, C. (1999). Rejection Criteria and Pairwise Discrimination
of Handwritten Numerals Based on Structural Features. Pattern Analysis & Applications,
2(3):228–238.
Ma, C., Randolph, M. A., and Drish, J. (2001). A support vector machines-based rejection
technique for speech recognition. ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings, 1:381–384.
Madras, D., Pitassi, T., and Zemel, R. (2018). Predict responsibly: Improving fairness and
accuracy by learning to defer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018-
Decem(NeurIPS):6147–6157.
Markou, M. and Singh, S. (2003). Novelty detection: a review—part 1: statistical approaches.
Signal Processing, 83(12):2481–2497.
Marrocco, C., Molinara, M., and Tortorella, F. (2007). An empirical comparison of ideal and
empirical ROC-based reject rules. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 4571
LNAI, pages 47–60. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Martens, T., Perini, L., and Davis, J. (2023). Semi-Supervised Learning from Active Noisy
Soft Labels for Anomaly Detection. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases . Springer Cham.
Mena, J., Pujol, O., and Vitria, J. (2020). Uncertainty-Based Rejection Wrappers for Black-
Box Classifiers. IEEE Access, 8:101721–101746.
Mesquita, D. P., Rocha, L. S., Gomes, J. P. P., and da Rocha Neto, A. R. (2016). Classification
with reject option for software defect prediction.Applied Soft Computing Journal, 49:1085–
1093.
Mozannar, H. and Sontag, D. (2020). Consistent Estimators for Learning to Defer to an
Expert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01862 .
Muzzolini, R., Yang, Y.-H., and Pierson, R. (1998). Classifier design with incomplete knowledge. Pattern Recognition, 31(4):345–369.
Nadeem, M. S. A., Zucker, J., and Hanczar, B. (2010). Accuracy-Rejection Curves (ARCs) for
Comparing Classification Methods with a Reject Option. Machine Learning in Systems
Biology, 8:65–81.
Nalisnick, E., Matsukawa, A., Whye, Y., Dilan, T., and Balaji, G. (2019). Hybrid Models with
Deep and Invertible Features (ICML, 2019).
Nguyen, V.-L., Destercke, S., and H¨ ullermeier, E. (2019). Epistemic Uncertainty Sampling.
In International Conference On Discovery Science DS 2019 , volume 11828 LNAI, pages
72–86. Springer, Cham.
Nguyen, V. L. and H¨ ullermeier, E. (2020). Reliable multilabel classification: Prediction with
partial abstention. In AAAI 2020 - 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,
volume 34, pages 5264–5271.
Nguyen, V. L. and H¨ ullermeier, E. (2021). Multilabel classification with partial Abstention:
Bayes-optimal prediction under label independence. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 72:613–665.
Ni, C., Charoenphakdee, N., Honda, J., and Sugiyama, M. (2019). On the Calibration of
Multiclass Classification with Rejection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10655 , pages 1–31.
Pang, T., Zhang, H., He, D., Dong, Y., Su, H., Chen, W., Zhu, J., and Liu, T.-Y. (2021).
Adversarial Training with Rectified Rejection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14785 , pages
1–23.
Pang, T., Zhang, H., He, D., Dong, Y., Su, H., Chen, W., Zhu, J., and Liu, T. Y. (2022).
Two Coupled Rejection Metrics Can Tell Adversarial Examples Apart. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
volume 2022-June, pages 15202–15212.
Pazzani, M. J., Murphy, P., Ali, K., and Schulenburg, D. (1994). Tradingoff coverage for
accuracy in forecasts: Applications to clinical data analysis. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Symposium on AI in Medicine , pages 100–104.
Perello-Nieto, M., Filho, T. M., Kull, M., and Flach, P. (2017). Background check: A general
technique to build more reliable and versatile classifiers. In Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM , pages 1143–1148.

40 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Perini, L., Buerkner, P., and Klami, A. (2022a). Estimating the Contamination Factor’s Distribution in Unsupervised Anomaly Detection. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML 2023).
Perini, L., Galvin, C., and Vercruyssen, V. (2020a). A Ranking Stability Measure for Quantifying the Robustness of Anomaly Detection Methods. Communications in Computer and
Information Science, 1323:397–408.
Perini, L., Giannuzzi, D., and Davis, J. (2023). How to Allocate your Label Budget? Choosing
between Active Learning and Learning to Reject in Anomaly Detection. (1).
Perini, L., Vercruyssen, V., and Davis, J. (2020b). Quantifying the Confidence of Anomaly
Detectors in Their Example-Wise Predictions. In Proceedings of European Conference
on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases ,
Ghent, Belgium. ECML-PKDD.
Perini, L., Vercruyssen, V., and Davis, J. (2022b). Transferring the Contamination Factor
between Anomaly Detection Domains by Shape Similarity. Proceedings of the 36th AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022 , 36:4128–4136.
Pietraszek, T. (2005). Optimizing abstaining classifiers using ROC analysis. In Proceedings of
the 22nd international conference on Machine learning - ICML ’05 , pages 665–672, New
York, New York, USA. ACM Press.
Pietraszek, T. (2007). On the use of ROC analysis for the optimization of abstaining classifiers.
Machine Learning, 68(2):137–169.
Pillai, I., Fumera, G., and Roli, F. (2011). A Classification Approach with a Reject Option for
Multi-label Problems. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 6978 LNCS, pages
98–107. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Pillai, I., Fumera, G., and Roli, F. (2013). Multi-label classification with a reject option.
Pattern Recognition, 46(8):2256–2266.
Pimentel, M. A., Clifton, D. A., Clifton, L., and Tarassenko, L. (2014). A review of novelty
detection. Signal Processing, 99:215–249.
Prasad, M. and Sowmya, A. (2008). Multi-level classification of emphysema in HRCT lung
images using delegated classifiers. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) , 5241
LNCS(PART 1):59–66.
Prasad, N. R., Almanza-Garcia, S., and Lu, T. T. (2009). Anomaly detection. Computers,
Materials and Continua , 14(1):1–22.
Puchkin, N. and Zhivotovskiy, N. (2022). Exponential Savings in Agnostic Active Learning
Through Abstention. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 68(7):4651–4665.
Pudil, P., Novoviˇ cova, J., Bl´ aha, S., and Kittler, J. (1992). Multistage pattern recognition
with reject option. In Proceedings - International Conference on Pattern Recognition ,
volume 2, pages 92–95.
Pugnana, A. and Ruggieri, S. (2022). AUC-based Selective Classification. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 206.
Pugnana, A. and Ruggieri, S. (2023). A Model-Agnostic Heuristics for Selective Classification.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 37(8):9461–9469.
Rahman, A. and Fairhurst, M. (1998). An evaluation of multi-expert configurations for the
recognition of handwritten numerals. Pattern Recognition, 31(9):1255–1273.
Ramaswamy, H. G., Tewari, A., and Agarwal, S. (2018). Consistent algorithms for multiclass
classification with an abstain option. Electronic Journal of Statistics , 12(1):530–554.
Ruggieri, S., Alvarez, J. M., Pugnana, A., State, L., and Turini, F. (2023). Can We Trust
Fair-AI ? AAAI 2023.
Sambu Seo, Wallat, M., Graepel, T., and Obermayer, K. (2000). Gaussian process regression:
active data selection and test point rejection. In Proceedings of the IEEE-INNS-ENNS
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IJCNN 2000. Neural Computing:
New Challenges and Perspectives for the New Millennium, volume 3, pages 241–246. IEEE.
Sansone, C., Tortorella, F., and Vento, M. (2001). A classification reliability driven reject
rule for multi-expert systems. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial
Intelligence, 15(06):885–904.
Santos-Pereira, C. M. and Pires, A. M. (2005). On optimal reject rules and ROC curves.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 26(7):943–952.
Sayedi, A., Zadimoghaddam, M., and Blum, A. (2010). Trading off mistakes and don’t-know
predictions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23: 24th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2010, NIPS 2010 , pages 1–9.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 41
Senge, R., B¨ osner, S., Dembczy´ nski, K., Haasenritter, J., Hirsch, O., Donner-Banzhoff, N.,
and H¨ ullermeier, E. (2014). Reliable classification: Learning classifiers that distinguish
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. Information Sciences, 255:16–29.
Settles, B. (2009). Active Learning Literature Survey.
Sharma, M. and Bilgic, M. (2017). Evidence-based uncertainty sampling for active learning.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 31(1):164–202.
Shekhar, S., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Javidi, T. (2019). Binary Classification with Bounded
Abstention Rate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09561 , pages 1–35.
Shekhar, S., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Javidi, T. (2020). Active Learning for Classification with
Abstention. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory - Proceedings , 2020-
June(2):2801–2806.
Shen, S. Q., Yang, B. B., and Gao, W. (2020a). AUC optimization with a reject option. AAAI
2020 - 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 5686–5691.
Shen, Z., Chen, X., and Garibaldi, J. M. (2020b). A novel meta learning framework for feature
selection using data synthesis and fuzzy similarity. IEEE International Conference on
Fuzzy Systems, 2020-July.
Shpakova, T. and Sokolovska, N. (2021). Probabilistic personalised cascade with abstention.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 147:8–15.
Singh, S. and Markou, M. (2004). An Approach to Novelty Detection Applied to the Classification of Image Regions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,
16(4):396–407.
Sotgiu, A., Demontis, A., Melis, M., Biggio, B., Fumera, G., Feng, X., and Roli, F. (2020).
Deep neural rejection against adversarial examples. EURASIP Journal on Information
Security, 2020(1):5.
Suutala, J., Pirttikangas, S., Riekki, J., and R¨ oning, J. (2004). Reject-Optional LVQ-Based
Two-Level Classifier to Improve Reliability in Footstep Identification. In Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, volume 3001, pages 182–187. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Tang, W. and Sazonov, E. S. (2014). Highly Accurate Recognition of Human Postures and
Activities Through Classification With Rejection. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, 18(1):309–315.
Tax, D. M. and Duin, R. P. (2008). Growing a multi-class classifier with a reject option.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 29(10):1565–1570.
Temanni, M.-r. and Nadeem, S. A. (2007). Aggregating Abstaining and Delegating Classifiers For Improving Classification performance : An application to lung cancer survival
prediction. Camda 07, (January 2017).
Thulasidasan, S., Bhattacharya, T., Bilmes, J., Chennupati, G., and Mohd-Yusof, J. (2019).
Combating Label Noise in Deep Learning Using Abstention. In Proceedings of the 36 th
International Conference on Machine Learning .
Tortorella, F. (2000). An Optimal Reject Rule for Binary Classifiers. In Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, volume 1876 LNCS, pages 611–620. Springer Cham.
Tremmel, C., Fernandez-Vargas, J., Stamos, D., Cinel, C., Pontil, M., Citi, L., and Poli, R.
(2022). A meta-learning BCI for estimating decision confidence. Journal of Neural Engineering, 19(4).
Ulmer, D. and Cin` a, G. (2020). Know Your Limits: Uncertainty Estimation with ReLU Classifiers Fails at Reliable OOD Detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05329 .
Urahama, K. and Furukawa, Y. (1995). Gradient descent learning of nearest neighbor classifiers
with outlier rejection. Pattern Recognition, 28(5):761–768.
Vailaya, A. and Jain, A. (2000). Reject option for VQ-based Bayesian classification. In Proceedings 15th International Conference on Pattern Recognition. ICPR-2000 , volume 2,
pages 48–51. IEEE Comput. Soc.
Van Craenendonck, T., Meert, W., Dumanˇ ci´ c, S., and Blockeel, H. (2018). COBRASTS: A
New Approach to Semi-supervised Clustering of Time Series. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics), 11198 LNAI:179–193.
Van der Plas, D., Meert, W., Verbraecken, J., and Davis, J. (2021). A reject option for
automated sleep stage scoring. In ICML Workshop on Interpretable Machine Learning in
Healthcare, Virtual event.
Van der Plas, D., Meert, W., Verbraecken, J., and Davis, J. (2023). A novel reject option
applied to sleep stage scoring. In Proceedings of the 2023 SIAM International Conference
on Data Mining (SDM) , page 820–828.

42 Hendrickx K., Perini L., et al
Vanderlooy, S., Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, I., and Smirnov, E. (2006a). Reliable classifiers in ROC
space. Proceedings of the 15th BENELEARN Machine Learning Conference , page 27.
Vanderlooy, S., Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, I. G., and Smirnov, E. N. (2006b). An analysis of reliable
classifiers through ROC isometrics. ROC Analysis in Machine Learning , (Citeseer).
Vanschoren, J. (2018). Meta-Learning: A Survey. pages 1–29.
Varshney, K. R. (2006). A Kernel Based Rejection Method for Supervised Classification.
International Journal of Computational Intelligence , 3(4):312–321.
Varshney, K. R. (2011). A risk bound for ensemble classification with a reject option. In 2011
IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP) , pages 769–772. IEEE.
Vasconcelos, G., Fairhurst, M., and Bisset, D. (1993). Enhanced reliability of multilayer perceptron networks through controlled pattern rejection. Electronics Letters, 29(3):261.
Vasconcelos, G., Fairhurst, M., and Bisset, D. (1995). Investigating feedforward neural networks with respect to the rejection of spurious patterns. Pattern Recognition Letters ,
16(2):207–212.
Vercruyssen, V., Meert, W., Verbruggen, G., Maes, K., Baumer, R., and Davis, J. (2018).
Semi-Supervised Anomaly Detection with an Application to Water Analytics. Proceedings
- IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM , 2018-Novem:527–536.
Villmann, T., Kaden, M., Nebel, D., and Biehl, M. (2015). Learning Vector Quantization with
Adaptive Cost-Based Outlier-Rejection. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume
9257, pages 772–782. Springer, Cham.
Wang, X. and Yiu, S. M. (2020). Classification with Rejection: Scaling Generative Classifiers
with Supervised Deep Infomax. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 2980–2986, California. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization.
Wegkamp, M. H. (2007). Lasso type classifiers with a reject option. Electronic Journal of
Statistics, 1:155–168.
Wegkamp, M. H. and Yuan, M. (2012). Support vector machines with a reject option.
Bernoulli, 17(4):1368–1385.
Wu, Q., Jia, C., and Chen, W. (2007). A Novel Classification-Rejection Sphere SVMs for Multiclass Classification Problems. In Third International Conference on Natural Computation
(ICNC 2007), volume 1, pages 34–38. IEEE.
Xu, L., Krzyzak, A., Suen, C. Y. C., Krzy˙ zak, A., and Suen, C. Y. C. (1992). Methods of
Combining Multiple Classifiers and Their Applications to Handwriting Recognition. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , 22(3):418–435.
Yuan, M. and Wegkamp, M. H. (2010). Classification methods with reject option based on
convex risk minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:111–130.
Zhang, B. (2013). Reliable classification of vehicle types based on cascade classifier ensembles.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 14(1):322–332.
Zhang, C. and Chaudhuri, K. (2014). Beyond disagreement-based agnostic active learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 1(January):442–450.
Zhang, C., Wang, W., and Qiao, X. (2018). On Reject and Refine Options in Multicategory
Classification. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(522):730–745.
Zhang, R. and Metaxas, D. (2006). RO-SVM: Support Vector Machine with Reject Option
for Image Categorization. In Procedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2006 ,
pages 1–123. British Machine Vision Association.
Zheng, E.-h., Zou, C., Sun, J., and Chen, L. (2011). Cost-sensitive SVM with Error Cost and
Class-dependent Reject Cost. International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering,
3(1):130–135.
Zhou, L., Mart´ ınez-Plumed, F., Hern´ andez-Orallo, J., Ferri, C., and Schellaert, W. (2022).
Reject Before You Run: Small Assessors Anticipate Big Language Models. In CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, volume 3169.
Zidelmal, Z., Amirou, A., and Belouchrani, A. (2012). Heartbeat classifcation using support
vector machines (SVMs) with an embedded reject option.International Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, 26(01):1250001.
Ziyin, L., Wang, Z. T., Liang, P. P., Salakhutdinov, R., Morency, L. P., and Ueda, M. (2019).
Deep gamblers: Learning to abstain with portfolio theory. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 32(NeurIPS):1–17.
Zong, W., Huang, G. B., and Chen, Y. (2013). Weighted extreme learning machine for imbalance learning. Neurocomputing, 101:229–242.

Machine Learning with a Reject Option: A survey 43
Zou, C., Zheng, E.-h., Xu, H.-w., and Chen, L. (2011). Cost-sensitive Multi-class SVM with
Reject Option: A Method for Steam Turbine Generator Fault Diagnosis. International
Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering , 3(1):77–83.