REF OR TRESUMES
ED 019 631
THE CASE FOR CASE.
BY- FILLMORE, CHARLES J.
ECRS PRICEMF-$0.75HC-$5.48135P.
AL ODD 413
PUB DATEAPR 67
DESCRIPTORS- *LANGUAGE UNIVERSALS;*GRAMMAR, *DEEP STRUCTURE)
*SURFACE STRUCTURE, LINGUISTICTHEORY, LANGUAGE TYPOLOGY:
PHRASE STRUCTURE, TRANSFORMATIONTHEORY (LANGUAGE),
TRANSFORMATION GENERATIVE GRAMMAR,NOMINALS, CASE, BASE
COMPONENT,
IN THIS PAPER, PREPARED FOR THEAPRIL 1967 TEXAS
SYMPOSIUM ON LINGUISTIC UNIVERSALS,IT IS PROPOSED THAT THE
GRAMMATICAL NOTION "CASE" DESERVESA PLACE IN THE BASE
COMPONENT OF THE GRAMMAR OF EVERYLANGUAGE. IT IS ARGUED THAT
PAST RESEARCH HAS NOT LED TOVALID INSIGHTS ON CASE
RELATIONSHIPS AND THAT WHAT IS NEEDEDIS A CONCEPTION OF BASE
STRUCTURE IN WHICH CASE RELATIONSHIPSARE PRIMITIVE TERMS OF
THE THEORY AND IN WHICH SUCHCONCEPTS AS "SUBJECT" AND
"DIRECT OBJECT" ARE MISSING. THELATTER ARE REGARDED AS
PROPER ONLY TO THE SURFACE STRUCTUREOF SOME (BUT POSSIBLY
NOT ALL). LANGUAGES. BASIC TOTHESE ARGUMENTS ARE TWO
ASSUMPTIONS NOW TAKEN FOR GRANTED BYGENERATIVE
GRAMMARIANS--(1) THE CENTRALITY OF SYNTAX,AND (2) THE
IMPORTANCE OF COVERT CATEGORIES. THEAUTHOR PROPOSES "THAT
THERE ARE MANY SEMANTICALLY RELEVANTSYNTACTIC REALTIONSHIFS
INVOLVING NOUNS AND THE STRUCTURESTHAT CONTAIN THEM, THAT
THESE RELATIONSHIPS ARE IN LARGEFART COVERT BUT ARE
NEVERTHELESS EMPIRICALLY DISCOVERABLE,THAT THEY FORM A
SPECIFIC FINITE SET, AND THATOBSERVATIONS MADE ABOUT THEM
WILL TURN OUT TO HAVE CONSIDERABLECROSS-LINGUISTIC
VALIDITY." HE REFERS TO THESEAS "CASE" RELATIONSHIPS AND THE
GRAMMAR PROPOSED AND OUTLINED HEREIS "CASE GRAMMAR." THE
SUBSTANTIVE MODIFICATION TO THETHEORY OF TRANSFORMATIONAL
GRAMMAR WHICH HE PROPOSES AMOUNTS TOA REINTRODUCTION OF THE
"CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK" INTERPRETATIONOF CASE SYSTEMS BUT
WITH A CLEARER UNDERSTANDING OF THEDIFFERENCE BETWEEN DEEP
AND SURFACE STRUCTURE. THE SENTENCEIN ITS BASIC STRUCTURE
CONSISTS OF A VERB AND ONE OR MORENOUN PHRASES, EACH
ASSOCIATED WITH THE VERB IN A PARTICULARCASE RELATIONSHIP.
THE "EXPLANATORY" USE OF THISFRAMEWORK RESIDES IN THE
NECESSARY CLAIM THAT, ALTHOUGH THERECAN BE COMPOUND
INSTANCES OF A SINGLE CASE (THROUGHNOUN PHRASE CONJUNCTION),
EACH CASE RELATIONSHIP OCCURS ONLYONCE.IN A SIMPLE SENTENCE.
THIS DOCUMENT WILL APPEAR IN"PROCEEDINGS OF THE TEXAS
SYMPOSIUM ON LANGUAGE UNIVERSALS,APRIL 13 -15, 1967," EMMON
BACH AND ROBERT HARMS, EDITORS,HOLT, RINEHART AND WINSTON.
(JD)


U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION & WELFARE
OFFICE OF EDUCATION
THIS DOCUMENT iIAS BEEN REPRODUCED EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM THE
PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIGINATING IT.POINTS OF VIEW OR OPINIONS
STATED DO NOT NECESSARILY REPRESENT OFFICIAL OFFICE OF EDUCATION
CZ)POSITION OR POLICY.
1-44
The Case for Case*
by
"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS
111111111111 MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED
BYCif ARLE5J:PtLLMORE
TO ERIC AND ORGANIZATIONS OPERATING
Charles J. FillmoreUNDER AGREEMENTS WITH THE U.S. OFFICE OF
The Ohio State UniversityEDUCATION. FURTHER REPRODUCTION OUTSIDE
THE ERIC SYSTEM REQUIRES PERMISSION OF
THE MUM OWNER."
To appear in Emmon Bach and Robert Harms, eds., Proceedings
of the Texas Symposium, on Language UniversalsApril 13-15,
1967 (Holt, Rinehart and Winston)
*The time I needed for preparing this study was created by an
act of the College of Arts and Sciences ofThe Ohio State
University: I was released from teaching duties during the
winter quarter of 1967.I gratefully acknowledge this boost
and hope that I may be forgiven for changing topicsmidquarter.Many co-workers have kept me supplied with suggestions, criticisms and challenges during the past few months.
I am particularly indebted to D. Terence Langendoen(Ohio
State), George Lakoff (Harvard) and Paul M. Postal (Queens
College).I shall probably soon regret that I have not
always been wise enough to follow their counsel.
AL 000 413


The Case for Case
Charles J. Fillmore
The Ohio State University
Prepared for the 1967 Texas Symposium on Linguistic Universals,
April 13-15.
Speculation on language universals has not always and
everywhere been viewed as a fully respectable pastime for the
scientific linguist.The writer recalls a Linguistic Institute
lecture of not many summers ago in which it was announced that
the only really secure generalization on language that linguists
are prepared to make is that "some members of some human communities have been observed to interact by means of vocal noises."
Times have changed, it is a pleasure to report, and this is partly
because we now have clearer ideas about what linguistic theories
are theories of, and partly because some linguists are willing to
risk the danger of being dead wrong.
Scholars who have striven to uncover syntactic features common
to all of the world's languages have generally addressed themselves
to three intimately related but distinguishable orders of questions,
and they are: (a) what are the formal and substantive universals
of syntactic structure? (b) is there a universal base, and, ifso,
what are its properties? and (c) are thereany universally valid
constraints on the ways in which deep structure representations of
sentences are given expression in the surface structure?
Concerning formal universals we find such proposalsas Chomsky's,
that each grammar has a base component capable of characterizing
the underlying syntactic structure of just the sentences in the


,paim=e
language at hand and which contains at least a set of transformation rules the function of which is to map the underlying
structures provided by the base component into structures more
closely identifiable with phonetic descriptions of utterances
in that language.1A representative statement on substantive
1NoamChomsky, ASPECTS OF THE THEORY OF SYNTAX, MIT Press (1965),
pp. 251.27-30.
syntactic universals is Lyons' assertion that every grammar
reequires such categories as Noun, Predicator and Sentence, but
that other grammatical categories and featuresmay be differently
arranged in different languages.2And Bach has given reasons to
2John Lyons, "Towards a 'notional' theory of the 'parts of speech',"
JOURNAL OF LINGUISTICS, 11(1966) 209-236; 211, 223.
believe that there is a universal set of transformations which
each language draws from in its own way, and he has shown what
such transformations might look like in the case of relative clause
modification.3
3EmmonBach, "On some recurrent types of transformations,"
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY MONOGRAPH NO. 18 ON LANGUAGES AND LINGUISTICS
(1965) 3-18.
Discussions on the possibility of a universal base (as distinct
from claims about universal constraints on the form of the base
component) have mainly been concerned with whether theelements
specified in the rules of a universal base--if there is one--are
sequential or not.A common assumption is that the universal


base specifies the needed syntactic relations, but the assignment of sequential order to the constituents of base structures
is language specific.Appeals for sequence-free representations
of the universal deep structure have been made by Halliday4
,
M. A. K. Halliday, "Some noteson 'deep' grammar," JOURNAL OF
LINGUISTICS, II (1966) 55-67.
Tesniere5
,and others.Lyons6recommends leaving for empirical
Lucian Tesniere, ELEMENTS DE SYNTAXE STRUCTURALE, Paris- Klincksieck
(1959).
6Lyons (1966) 227.
investigation the question of the relationship between the underlying representation and sequential order,anBach7has suggested
'Bach(1965) 13.
that continued investigation of the syntactic rules of the world's
languages may eventually provide reasons for assuming specific
ordering relations in the rules of a universal base.
Greenberg's statistical studies ofsequence patterns in
selected groups of languages do not, itseems to me, shed any
direct light on the issue athand.8They may be regarded as pro-
Joseph Greenberg, "Some universals of grammar,"in J. Greenberg,
ed., LANGUAGE UNIVERSALS, MIT Press (1963) 58-90.
viding data which, when accompanied byan understanding of the
nature of syntactic processes in the specific languages,may eventually lend comfort tosome proposalother on either the
sequential properties ofthe base component or the universal
constraints whichgovern the surface ordering of syntactically
crganized objects.
Findings whichmay be interpreted as suggestinganswers
to our third questionare found in the 'markedness' studies of
Greenberg9and in the so-called 'implicationaluniversals' of
9Joseph Greenberg,"Language universals," in T. A.Sebeok, ed.,CURRENT TRENDS IN LINGUISTICS,III, Mouton (1966) 61-112.
111
Jakobson.10If such studiescan be interpreted as making empirical
10Roman Jakobson, "Typologicalstudies and their contributionto
historical comparative linguistics,"in E. Sivertsen, ed.,PROCEEDINGS OF THE VIIITHINTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF LINGUISTS,
Oslo University Press (1958)17-25.
assertions about the mappingof deep structures intosurface structures, they may point touniversal constraints of thefollowing
form: While the grammaticalfeature 'dual' is madeuse of in one
way or another in all languages, onlythose languages whichhave
some overt morpheme indicating 'plural'will have overt morphemes
indicating 'dual'.The theory of implicationaluniversals does not
need to be interpreted, in otherwords, as a set ofassertions on
the character of possibledeep structures in humanlanguages and
the ways in which theydiffer from one another.
The presentessay is intended as a contributionto the study
of formal and substantivesyntactic universals.Questions of
linear ordering are left untouched,or at least unresolved, and


-5
IOW
questions of markedness are viewed as presupposing structures
having properties of the kind to be developed in these pagea.
My paper will plead that the grammatical notion 'case'
deserves a place in the base component of the grammar of every
language.In the past, research on 'case' has amounted to an examination of the variety of semantic relationships which can hold
between nouns and other portions of sentences; it has been considered equi,ralent to the study of semantic functions of inflectional
affixes on nouns or the formal dependency relations which hold
between specific nominal affixes and lexical-grammatical properties of neighboring elements; or it has been reduced to a statement
of the morphophonemic reflexes of a set of underlying 'syntactic
relations' which themselves are conceived independently of the
notion of 'case'.I shall argue that valid insights on case relationships are missed in all these studies, and that what is needed
is a conception of base structure in which case relationships are
primitive terms of the theory11and in which such concepts as 'subject'
11Notational difficulties make it impossible to introduce 'case'
as a true primitive as long as the phrase-structure model determines the form of the base rules.My claim is, then, that a
designated set of case categories is provided for every language,
with more or less specific syntactic, lexical and semantic consequences, and that the attempt to restrict the notion of 'case' to
the surface structure must fail.
and 'direct object' are missing.The latter are regarded as proper
only to the surface structure of some (but possibly not all)
languages.


Two assumptions are essential to the development of the
argument, assumptions that are, in fact, taken for granted by workers
in the generative grammar tradition.The first of, these is the
centrality of syntax.There was a time when a typical linguistic
grammar was a long; and detailed account of the morphological structure of various classes of words, followed by a two or three page
appendit called 'Syntax' which offered a handful of rules of thumb
on how to 'use' the words described in the preceding sectiois--
how to combine them into sentences.
In grammars where syntax is central, the forms of wordsare
specified with respect to syntactic concepts, not the other way
around.The modern grammarian, in other words, will describe the
'comparative construction' of a given language in the most global
terms possible, and will then add to that a description of the
morphophonemic consequences of choosing particular adjectives or
quantifiers within this construction.This'is altogether different
from first describing the morphology of words like taller and
more and then adding random observations on how these words show
up in larger constructions.12
12John R. Ross pointed out, during the symposium, that there exist
some syntactic processes which seem to depend on (and therefore
'follow') particular lexical realizations of just such entitiesas
the comparative forms of adjectives.Compared adjectives, in short,
may be iterated, just as long as they have all been given identical
surface realizations.Witness
(i)she became friendlier and friendlier
(ii)she became sore and more friendly
(iii)*she became friendlier and more friendly
but not


The second assumption I wish to make explicit is thee,
importance of covert categories.Many recent and not-so-recent
studies have convinced us of the relevance of grammatical properties
which lack obvious 'morphemic' realizations but whose reality can
be observed on the basis of selectional constraints and transformational possibilities.We are constantly finding that grammatical
features found in one language show up in some form or other in
other languages as well, if we have the subtlety it takes to discover
covert categories.Incidentally, I find it interesting that the
concept 'covert category'--a concept which is making it possible
to believe that at bottom all languages are essentially alike--was
introduced most convincingly in the writings of Whorf, the man
whose name is most directly associated with the doctrine that deepseated structural differences between languages determine the
essentially non-comparable ways in which speakers of different
languages deal with reality.13
Alin
13BenjaminLee Whorf, "A linguistic consideration of thinking in
primitive communities" (c. 1936), in J. B. Carroll, ed., LANGUAGE,
THOUGHT AND REALITY: SELECTED WRITINGS OF BENJAMIN LEE WHORF, MIT
Press (1965) 65-86; 69ff.
One example of a 'covert' grammatical distinction is the one
to which traditional grammarians have attached the labels 'affectum'
vs. 'effectum', in German 'affiziertes Objekt' vs.' effiziertes
Objekt.' The distinction, which is reportedly made overt in some
languages, can be seen in sentences (1) and (2) below.
(1)John ruined the table
(2)John built the table


Note that in one case the object is understoodas existing
antecedently to John's activities, while in the other case its
existence resulted from John's activities.
Having depended so far on only 'introspective evidence', we
might be inclined to say that the distinction is purely a semantic
one, one which the grammar of English does not force us to deal with.
Our ability to give distinct interpretations to the verb-object
relation in these two sentences has no connection, we might feel,
with a correct description of the specifically syntactical skills
of a speaker of English.
The distinction does have syntactic relevance, however.The
'effectum' object, for example, does not permit interrogation of
the verb with do to, while 'Wu, affectum object does.Thus one might
relate sentence (1), but not sentence (a), to the question given
in (3).
(3)what did John do to the table?
Furthermore, while sentence (1) has sentence (4)as a paraphrase,
sentence (5) is not a paraphrase of sentence (2).
(4)what John did to the table wcs ruin it
(5) *what John did to the tablewas buildit14
1This observation is due to Paul M. Postal.
To give another example, note that both of the relationships in
question may be seen in sentence (6) but that only inone of the
two senses is sentence (6) a paraphrase of sentence (7).
(6)John paints nudes
(7)what John does to nudes is paint them


- 9 -
There is polysemy in the direct olject of (6),true, but the
difference also lies in whether the objects John painted existed
before or after he did the painting.
I am going to suggest below that thereare many semantically
relevant syntactic relationships involvingnouns and the structures
that contain them, that these relationships--like thoseseen in (1)
and (2)--are in large part covert butare nevertheless empirically
discoverable, that they forma specific finite sets and that
observations made about them willturn out to have considerable
cross-linguistic validity.I shall refer to theseas 'case' relationships.


1.Earlier approaches to the study of case
Books written to introduce students to our discipline
seldom fail to acquaint their readers with the 'wrong' ways of
using particular case systems as universal models for language
structure.Grammarians who accepted the case system of Latin or
Greek as a valid framework for the linguistic expression of all
human experience were very likely, we have been told, to spend a
long time asking the wrong kinds of questions when they attempted
to learn and describe Aleut or Thai.We have probably all
enjoyed sneering, with Jespersen, at his favorite 'bad guy',
Sonnenschein, who, unable to decide between'Latin and Old English,
allowed modern English teach to be described as either taking a
Dative and an Accusative, because thatwas the pattern for Old
English tocsin, or as taking two Accgsatives, in the manner of
Latin doceo and German lehren.15
15J.Otto Jespersen, THE PHILOSOPHY OF GRAMMAR (1924), Norton
Paperback Reprint (1965), Pp. 357: 175.
Looking for one man's case system in another man's language
is not, of course, a good example of the study of case..The
apprellMhes to the study of case that do need to be taken seriously
are of several varieties.Many traditional studies have examined,
in somewhat semantic terms, the various uses of case.More recent
work has been directed toward the analysis of the case systems of
given languages, under the assumptions suggested by the word 'system.'
A great deal of research, early and late, has been devoted to an


understanding of the history or evolution of case notions or of
case morphemes.And lastly, the generative grammarians have for
the most part viewed case markers as surface structure reflexes,
introduced by rules, of various kinds of deep and surface
syntactic relations.
1.1Case uses
The standard handbooks of Greek and Latin typically devote much
of their bulk to the classification and illustration of semantically
different relationships representable by given case forms.The
sub-headings of these classifications are most commonly of the form
'X ofwhere 010 is the name of a particular case and 'Y' is the
name for a particular 'use' of X.The reader will recall such terms
as 'Dative of Separation', 'Dative of possession', and so on.16
Milli=111ENW
1For an extensive description of this type, see Charles Bennett,
SYNTAX OF EARLY LATIN, II: THE CASES, Boston (1914) Pp. 409.
Apart from the fact that such studies do not start out from
the point of view of the centrality of syntax, the major defects
of these studies were (a) that the Nominative was largely ignored
and (b) that classificatory criteria were often confused which
ought to have been kept distinct.
The neglect of the nominative in studies of case uses probably
has several sources, one being the etymological meaning ("deviation")
of the Greek term for case, ptOsis, which predisposed grammarians
to limit the term only to the non-nominative cases.The most important reason for omitting the nominative in these studies, however,


is the wrongly fssumed clarity of the concept 'subject of the
sentence.'Mi1111... published a study of nominative and accusative
case uses in Lat4a, in 1908, in which he devoted 170 some pages
to the accusative, somewhat less than one page to the nominative,
explaining that "Die beiden casus recta., der Nominativ and der
Vokativ, sind bei dem Streite fiber die Kasustheorie nicht beteiligt.
Im Nominativ steht das Subjekt, von dem der Satz etwasaussagt."17
411111111M10,111=111111111IMIP.MliVirAE113.11
17C.F. W. Willer, SYNTAX DES NOMINATIVS UND AKKUSATIVS IM LATEINI-
SCHEN, Leipzig (1908), Pp. 175; 1.
The role of the subject was regarded as so clear to Sweet that
he went so far as to claim that the nominative is the only case where
one can speak properly of a 'noun'.A sentence is viewed as a kind
of predication on a given noun, and every noun-like element in a
sentence other than the subject is really a kind of derived adverb,
a part of thepredication.18
Quoted in Jespersen (1924) 107.
1111111111Nalt
On a little reflection, however, it becomes obvious that semantic differences in the relationships between subjects and verbs are
of exactly the same order and exhibit the same extent if variety
as can be found in the other cases.There is in principle no reason
why the traditional studies of case uses fail to contain such classifications as 'Nominative of Personal Agent', 'Nominative of Patient',
'Nominative of Beneficiary', 'Nominative of Affected Persou', and
'Nominative of Interested Person' (or, possibly, 'Ethical Nominative')
for such sentences as (8) to (12) respectively.


(8)he hit the ball
(9)he received a blow
(10)he received a gift
(11)he loves her
(12)he has black hair
The confusion of criteria in treatments of the uses of cases
has been documented by de Groot in his study of the Latin genitive.19
19A. Willem de Groot, "C1assification of uses of a case illustrated
on the genitive in Latin," LINGUA, VI (1956) 8-66.
Uses of cases are classified on syntactic grounds, as illustrated
by the division of uses of the genitive according to whether the
genitive noun is in construction with a noun, an adjective or a
verb; on historical grounds, as when the uses of the syncretistic
Latin ablative case are divided into three classes, separative,
locative and instrumental; and on semantic grounds, in which there
is a great deal of confusion between meanings that can properly be
thought of as associated with the case forms of nouns, on the one
hand, and meanings that properly reside in neighboring words.
De Groot's dritical treatment of the traditional classification
of Latin genitive case uses is particularly interesting from the
point of view taken here, because in his 'simplification' of the
picture he rejects as irrelevant certain phenomena which generative
grammarians would insist definitely are of syntactic importance.
He claims, for example, that the traditional studies confuse difference of referents with differences of case uses.Thus, to de Groot
the traditional three senses of statua Mvronis (the statue possessed


- 14 -
by Myro--genitivus possessivus; statue sculpted by Myro--
genitivus subjectivus; statue depicting Myro--genitive of
represented subject) as well as the subjective and objective
senses of amor patris, are differences in practical,not in
linguistic facts.From arguments :such as this he is able to combine
twelve of the classical 'uses' into one, which he then labels the
'proper genitive', asserting that "the proper genitive denotes, and
consequently can be used to refer to, ,am thing-to-thing relation."20
20de Groot (1956) 35.
1111111MP,
He ends by reducing the thirty traditional 'uses of the genitive'
to eight21
,of which two are rare enougit to be left out of consider-
2From de Groot (1956) 30:
I.Adjunct to a noun
A.Proper genitive, eloquentia hominis
B.Genitive of quality, homo magnae eloquentiae
II.Adjunct to a substantivalr
C.Genitive of the set of persons, ,reliqui ,editum
III.Conjunct ('complement') of a copula
D.Genitive of the type of person, Ltspientis est aperte
odisse
IV.Adjunct to a verb
E.Genitive of purpose, Aegyptum profiscitue cognoscende
antiquitatis
F.Genitive of locality, Romae consules creabantur
IVa.Adjunct to a present participle
G.Genitive with a present participle, laboris fugiens
V.Genitive of exclamation, mercimoni lepidi
ation, and a third, 'genitive of locality', is really limited to
specific place names.
Benveniste's reply to de Groot's analysis appeared in the issue
of LINGUA dedicated to de Groot22
.There he proposes still further
22Emile Benveniste, "Pour l'analyse des fonctions casuelles: le
genitif latin," LINGUA, XI (1962) 10-18.


simplifications of the classification.Noting that de Groot's
'genitive of locality' applies only to proper place names, that
is, that it occurs only with place-names having -o- andstems,
in complementary distribution with the ablative, Benveniste wisely
suggests that this is something that should be catalogued as a fact
about place names, not as a fact about uses of the genitive case.
Benveniste's conclusions on the remaining genitive constructions
is quite congenial to the generative grammarian's position.He
proposes that the so-called 'proper genitive' basically results
from the process of converting a sentence into a nominal.The
meaning distinction between 'genitivus subjectivus' and 'genitivus
objectivus' constructions merely reflects the difference between
situations in which the genitive noun is an original subject or
and those where it is an original object, the genitive representing
a kind of neutralization of the nominative/accusative distinction
found in the underlying sentences.23
23Itmust be said, however, that Benveniste's desentential interpretation is diachronic rather than synchronic, for he goes on to
explain that it is on analogy from these basic verbal sources that
new genitive relations are created.From ludus pueri and risus
pueri, where the relation to ludit and ridet is fairly transparent,
the pattern was extended to include somnus pueri, mos pueri, and
finally liber pueri.The genitive grammarian may be inclined to
seek synchronic verbal connections--possibly through positing
abstract entities never realized as verbs--for these other genitives too.(See Benveniste (1962) 17.)
At least from the two mentioned studies ofuses of the Latin
genitive, it would appear (a) that some case- uses are purely irregular, requiring as their explanation a statement of the idiosyncratic grammatical requirements of specific lexical items, and


- 16 -
(b) that some semantic differences are accounted for independently
of assigning 'meanings' to cases: either byrecognizing meaning
differences in 'governing' words, or by notingleaning differences
in different underlying sentences.The suggestion that one can
find clear special meanings associated with surface casesfails
to receive strong support from these studies.
1.2Case systems
There are reasonable objections to approaching the case system
of one language from the point of view of the surface case system
of another (say, Classical Latin) by merely checking off the ways
in which a given case-relation in the chosen standardis given
expression in the language under observation.An acceptable alternative, apparently, is the inverse of this process: one identifies
case morphemes in the new languagewithin the system of noun
inflection, and then relates each of these to traditional or
'standard' case notions.To take just one recent example, Redden24
2James E. Redden, "Walapai II: morphology,"INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS, XXXII (1966), 141-163.
finds five case indices in Walapai(four suffixes and zero) and
identifies each of these with terms taken from thetradition of
case studies: -6 is nominative,.1 is accusative, -k is allative/
adessive, -1 is illative/incssive, and -m isablative/abessive.
Under each of these headings the author adds information about
the uses of the case-forms that may not bededucible from the
labels themselves.Nominative, for example, occurs only once in


- 17 -
a simple sentence--coordinateconjunction of subject nouns
requires use of the -m suffix on all the extra nounsintroduced;
accusative is used with some noun tokens which wouldnot be
considered direct objects in English;allative/adessive has a
partitive function; and ablative/abessive combinesablative,
instrumental, and comitative functions.
In a study of this type,slace what is at hand isthe surface
structure of the inflection system of Walapai nouns,the descriptive task is to identify the surface case formsthat are distinct
from each other in the language and to associate'case functions'
with each of these.What needs to be emphasized is(a) that such
a study does not presentdirectly available answers to such questions
as "how is the indirectobject expressed in this language?"(i.e.,
the system of possible case functions is notcalled on to provide
a descriptiveframework), and (b) that the functions or uses themselves are not taken as primary terms in the description(i.e., the
various 'functions' of the 'ablative/abessive' suffix -m arenot
interpreted as giving evidence that several distinct casesmerely
happen to behomophonous).25
25-These remarks are not intended to be critical ofRedden's study.
Indeed, in the aosence of a universal theory of caserelationships
there is no theoretically justified alternative tothis approach.
One approach to the study. of case systems, then, is to restrict
oneself to a morphological description of nouns and toimpose no
constraints on the ways in which the casemorphemes can be identified with their meanings or functions.This is distinct from studies
of case systems which attempt to find aunified meaning for each


-18
of the cases discovered in the language being studied.An
example of the latter approach is found in the now discredited
'localistic' view of the cases in Indo-Eurcpean, by which
dative is 'the case of rest,' accusative 'the case of movement
to,' and genitive 'the case of movement from.'26And recent
-276Thisinterpretation, discussed briefly in Jespersen (1924) p.
186, appears to date back to the Byzantine grammarian Maxime Planude.
INI110.0111MIO
attempts to capture single comprehensive 'meanings' of the cases
have suffered from the vagueness and circularity expected of any
attempt to find semantic characterizations of surface-structure
phenomena.27
27As an illustration of this last point, take Gonda's claim that
the Vedic dative is called for whenevera noun is used to refer to
the 'object in view.'The vacuity of this statement is seen in his
interpretation of
(i)vataya kaptla vidyut (Patanjali)
'a reddish lightning signifies wind'
as "the lightning has, so to say, wind in view".J. Gonda, "The
unity of the Vedic dative," LINGUAXI (1962) 141-150; 147.
The well-known studies of Hjelmslev28and Jakobson29are
28Louis Hjelmslev, "La cat6gorie des cas," ACTA JUTLANDICA, Aarhus,
VII.1 (1935) i-xii, 1-184; and IX.2 (1937) i-vii, 1-78.
29Roman Jakobson, "Beitrag zur allgemeinen Kasuslehre," TRAVAUX
DU CERCLE LINGUISTIQUE DE PRAGUE, VI (1936) 240-288; reprinted in
E. P. Hamp, F. W. Householder and R. Austerlitz, eds., READINGS
IN LINGUISTICS, II, University of Chicago Press (1966) 51-89.
attempts not only to unliover unified meanings of each of the cases,
but also to show that these meanings themselves form a coherent


-19-
system by their decomposability into distinctiveoppositions.
The possibility of vagueness is of course the moreincreased inasmuch as the number of oppositions is less thanthe number of
cases.30
30See, in this regard, the brief critical remarks ofA. H. Kuipers,
in "The Circassian nominal paradigm: acontribution to case theory,"
LINGUA, XI (1962) 231-248; 231.
The difficulties in discovering a unified meaning for each of
the cases in a case system has led to alternativeview: that all
but one of the cases can be given more or lessspecific meanings,
the meaning of the residual case being left open.This residual
case can either have whatever relationto the rest of the sentence
is required by the meanings:,of the neighboringwords, or it can
serve any purely case-like functionnot pre-empted by the other
cases.Goedicke is said by Bennett to have explained the accusative as "the case used for those functions notfulfilled by the
other cases."The fact that Bennett, following Whitney, ridiculed
this view on the grounds thatcase could be so described,
suggests that Goedicke's remark could not have been veryclearly
expressed.31A different approach is taken by Diver32
,who does
31Bennett (1914) 195, fn. 1.At the time of writing I have not
yet had access to the Goedicke original.
3 2WilliamDirer, "The system of agency of the Latin noun,"WORD,
XX (1964) 178-196.
not assign the 'left-over' function to a particular case assuch,
but to whatever case or cases are not requiredfor a given realiza-


-20-
tion of what he calls the 'agency system'.Briefly* and ignoring
his treatment of passive sentences, Diver's analysis is this: A
verb can have one, two, or three nouns (or noun phrases) associated
with it, corresponding generally to the intransitive, normal transitive, and transitive indirect object sentence types respectively.
In a three-noun sentence, the nouns are nominative, dative and
accusative, the nominative being the case of the Agent, the accusative the case of the Patient, with the dative, as the 'residue' case,
capable of expressing any notion compatible with the meaning of the
remainder of the sentence.The function of the dative in a threenoun sentence, in other words, is 'deduced' from the context, not
present as one of a number of possible 'meanings' of the dative case.33
33Thefollowing is from Diver (1964) 181: "In the sentence senatus
imperium mihi dedit 'the senate gave me supreme power', therm7Mtive, with the syntactic meaning of Agent, indicates the giver;
the Accusative, with the syntactic meaning of Patient, indicates
the gift.The question is: Does the Dative itself indicate the
recipient or merely that the attached word is neither the giver
nor the gift?"Diver makes the latter choice.In particular, he
states that "knowing that mihi, in the Dative, can be neither the
Agent (the giver) nor the TaTent (the gift), we deduce that it is
the recipient."
In two-noun sentences, one of the nouns is nominative, the other
either dative or accusative, but typically accusative.The nominative here is the case of the agent, but this time the accusative
(or the dative, whichever occurs) is the residue case.In a twonoun sentence, in other words, the accusative is not limited to
the meaning of Patient but can express any number of other meanings
as well.And, since it no longer contrasts with dative, it can be
replaced by a dative.The choice between dative and accusative in


- 21 -
two-noun sentences, since it is not semantically relevant, is
subject to random kinds of free and conditioned variation.
Carrying the argument through, the noun found in a one-noun
sentence can express any meaning relationship with the verb.The
noun, though most frequently nominative, may be accusative or
dative, but the choice is not due to meanings associated with
these cases.When the noun is nominative its 'syntactic meaning'
may be that of Agent, Patient, or anything else.
The inadequacy of Diver's treatment is clear.In the first
place, it seems unlikely that, as used in Diver ^ paper, the
notions Agent and Patient are in any sense satisfactory semantic
primitives.To agree that imperium in senatus imperium mihi dedit
is the Patient is nothing more than to agree to say the word 'Patient'
on seeing an accusative form in a three-noun sentence.For many
of Diver's examples, his argument would have been every bit as convincing if he had said that there is an unvarying function performed
by the dative, but the role of the accusative depends on such matters
as the lexical meaning of the verb.Furthermore, the "couple of
dozen verbs" which appear in two-noun sentences and which exhibit
some kind of semantic correlation involving the supposedly nonsignificant choice of accusative or dative should probably not be
set aside as unimportant exceptions.
Diver's proposal may be thought ofas an attempt to identify
the semantic contribution of cases seenas syntagmatically identified entities, while the positing of distinctive oppositions, in
the manner of Hjelmslev and Jakobson, is an attempt to see the
functioning of cases from the point of view of the concept of


- 22-
paradigmatic contrast.The latter view has been criticized by
Kurylowicz.The apparent contrast seen in Polish and Russian
3Jerzy Kury owicz, "Le problme du classement des cas" (1949), in
his collection ESQUISSES LINGUISTIQUES, WrocZaw-Krakov (1960) 131-
150; 134, 141.
between accusative and genitive (partitive) direct object, as
between (13) and (14)
(13)daj nam chleb'give us the bread'
(14)daj nam chleba'give us some bread'
is not a difference in the syntactic function of the object nouns
relative to the verb, but is rather a difference which falls into
that area of syntax that deals with the effect of the choice of
article, in languages having articles, on the semantic content of
the associated noun.The fact that in Russian the difference is
reflected as a difference in noun inflection does not along determine its character as a part of the case system proper of the
language.
The vertical contrast between locative and accusative nouns
after locative/directional prepositions, as in (15) and (16)
(15)on prygajet na stole'he jumps (up and down) on
the table'
(16)on prygajet na stol'he jumps onto the table'
is a difference that would be discussed in transformational-grammar
terms as involving a distinction between preposition-phrases which
are inside and those which are outside the verb phrase constituent.
That is, a Locative preposition-phrase which occurs outside the


-23-
constituent VP is one which indicates the place where the
action described by the VP takes place.A Locative prepositionphrase inside the VP is a complement to the verb.Inside a VP
the difference between the locative and directional senses is
entirely dependent on the associated verb; outside the VP the
sense is always locative.
Kurylowicz discussed (15) and (16) in essentially thesame
terms.To him the directional phrasena stol is 'more central'
to the verb than the locative phrase na stole.An apparent contrast appears just in case the same verb mayappear sometimes with
and sometimes without a locative (or directional) complement.
There is thus no genuine paradigmatic contrast found in such pairs
as (13)-(14) or (15)-(16).
Kurylowicz's own approach to the study ofcase systems brings
another order of grammatical fact into consideration: sentence
relatedness.Cases, in his view, form a network of relationships
mediated by such grammatical processesas the passive transformation.
The distinction between nominative and accusative, for example, is
a reflection in the system of cases of the more basic distinction between passive and active sentences.In his terms, hostis
occiditur becomes the predicate hostem occidit, the primary change
from occiditur to occidit bringing with it the concomitant change
from hostis to hostem.
Nominalizations of sentences have the effect of relating both
accusative and nominative to the genitive, for the former two are
neutralized under conversion to genitive,as illustrated by the
change from plebs secedit to secessio plebis (genitivus subjectivus)


- 24 -
as opposed tothe change from hostem occidere to occisiohostie
(genitivus objectivus).
The relationship between nominative and accusative,then, is
a reflex ofdiathesis; the relationship of these two togenitive
is mediated through the process of constructingdeverbal nouns.
The remaining cases--dative, ablative, instrumentaland locative- -
enter the network of relationships in that,secondarily to their
functions as adverbials, they each provide variantsof the accusative with certain verbs.That is, there are verbs that 'govern'
the ablative (e.g., utor), say, rather than theaccusative for
their 'direct objects'.35
1
35Kurylowicz (1960) 138-139; 144-147; 150.Also se, his THE
INFLECTIONAL CATEGORIES OF INDO-EUROPEAN, Heidelberg-CarlWinter
(1964) Pp. 246; 179-181.Somewhat similar interpretations of the
connections between case and diathesis are found inKlaus Heger,
"Valenz, Diathese and Kasus," ZEITSCHRIFT FURROMANISCHE PHILOLOGIE
(1966) 138-170; 161.
1.3Case histories
In addition to studies of case uses and interpretationsof
the cases in a given language as elements of acoherent system,
the literature also contains many historicalstudies of cases;
and these, too, are of various kinds.Some workers have sought
to discover the original meanings of the casesof a language or
family of languages, while others havesought to trace case morphemes
back to other kinds of morphemes--eithersyntactic function words
or some kind ofderivational morphemes.Still others have seen


-25-
in the history of one case system a casesystem of a different
type--with or without assumptions concerningthe 'essential
primitivity' of the earlier type.
A very common assumption among linguistic historianshas
been that case affixes are traceable back to non-casenotions.
The form which eventually became the Indo-European caseending
representing nominative singular masculine, i.e.*-s, has been
interpreted the demonstrative *so which had beenconverted into
a suffix indicating adefinite subject; and the *so in turn is
believed by some to have originated as aProto-Indo-Hittite sentenceconnective.36
'Georges
.Lane, review of Y. M. Biese, SOME NOTES ONTHE ORIGIN
OF THE INDO-EUROPEAN NOMINATIVE SINGULAR, Helsinki(1960) Pp. 15;
in LANGUAGE XXVII (1951) 372-374.
=111031
The same form has also been interpreted as a derivationalmorpheme
indicating a specific individual directly involved in anactivity,
contrasting with a different derivational affix *-mindicating a
non-active object or the product of an action.37Scholars who can
37See,for example, the statement by Winfred P. Lehmann inhis
"On earlier stages of the Indo-European nominal inflection,"
LANGUAGE, XXXIV (1958) 179-202; 190.
rest with the latter view are those who do not requireof themselves the belief that 'synthetic' languages necessarilyhave
antecedent 'analytic' stages.38
36Theimpression is sometimes given that theidentification of the
etymon of a case affix brings with it anaccount of the intellectual
evolution of the speakers of the language inquestion.If the


-26 -
interpretation of *-m and *-s as derivational morphemes is correct,
it does not follow that one has discovered, in the transition from
the earliest function of these elements to their later clear caselike uses any kind of 'abstraction' process, or tendency to pass
from 'concrete' to 'relational' modes of thought.Our methods of
reconstruction should certainly make it possible to detect basic
(i.e., deep structure) linguistic evolutionsif it is there to
discover, but the etymology of surface-structure morphemes should
not lead to assumptions about deep typological differences.What
I mean is that the underlying case structures of Proto -Indo-
European may have been justas precisely organized as those of any
of the daughter languages, and that the changes that have occurred
may have been entirely a matter of morphophonemic detail.From
the preponderance of (derived) active nouns in subject position,
one generation may have 're-interpreted' the suffix as a marker
of human subject; a later generation may have re-interpreted it
as merely a marker for the subject use of a particular set of
words--to state the possibilities in the most simple-minded way.
The change, in short,may well have been entirely in the economies
of bringing to the surface underlying structural features which
themselves underwent no change whatever.
SEN.MIMMIC,_
A second kind of speculation on historical changes within
case systems traces case systems of one kind back to case systems
of another kind.Of particular interest here is the suggestion
that the Indo-European case systems point back to an original
'ergative' system.Case typologies will be discussed in slightly
greater detail below, but briefly we can characterize an 'ergative'
system as one which assigns one case (the Ergative) to the subject
of a transitive verb, another to both the subject of an intransitive verb and the object of a transitive verb.An 'accusative'
system, on the other hand, is one which assigns one case to the
subject of either transitive or intransitive verbs, another (the
Accusative) to the object of a transitive verb.A common feature
of ergative systems is that the 'genitive' form is the same as
the Ergative (or, put differently, that the Ergative case has a
'genitive' function).


- 27 -
The connection of Indo-European *-s with animateness (the
subject of a transitive verb is typically animate), the original
identity of the nominative singular *-s with the genitive ending,
and the identity of the neuter ending *-m with the masculine
accusative form, have led many investigators to the conclusion
that our linguistic ancestors were speakers ofan 'ergative'
language.39It will be suggested below that, if sucha change
39Seeparticularly C.C. Uhlenbeck, "Agens and Patiens im
Kasussystem der indogermanischen Sprachen," INDOGERMANISCHE
FORSCHUNGEN, XII (1901), 170-171, where the *-m endingwas identified as a subject marker, the *-sas the agent marker in passive
sentences (a common interpretation of 'ergative' systems); and
Andre Valliant, "L'ergatif indo-europeen," BULLETIN DE LA SOCIETE
LINGUISTIQUE DE PARIS, XXVII (1936) 93-108.Lehmann finds the
arguments unconvincing, noting for example that evidence ofan
'ergative' ending cannot be found in pluralnouns or in feminines
in a.(Lehmann (1958) 190.)
has taken place, it is a change which involves the notion 'subject'.
1.4Case in current generativegrammar
A hitherto largely unquestioned assumptionabout case in the
writings of generative grammarians has been made explicit by Lyons:
"'case' (in the languages in which the category is tobe found) is
not present in 'deep structure' at all, but is merely the inflexional 'realization' of particular syntactic relationships."40
40Lyons (1966) 218.
The syntactic relationships in questionmay in fact be relationships that are defined only in the surface structure,as when the
surface subject of a sentence (destined to assume,say, a


.28
'nominative' form) has appearedas the result of the application
of the passive transformation,or when the 'genitive' marker is
introduced as an accompaniment toa nominalization transformation.
One of Chomsky's few remarkson case is in a discussion of the
peripheral nature of stylistic inversions; althoughcase forms
are assigned to English pronouns relatively late in thegrammar,
determined largely on surface structureposition, the stylistic
inversion rules are later still.In this way it becomes possible
to account for such formsas him I like, etc.; the shift of him
to the front of the sentence must follow theassignment of case
forms to the pronouns.41
Chomsky (1965) 221f.
It seems to me that the discussion ofcase could be seen in
a somewhat better perspective if the assignment ofcase forms
were viewed as exactly analogous to the rules for assigningprepositions in English, or postpositions in Japanese.42There are
42The suggestion is ofcourse not novel.According to Hjelmslev,
the first scholar to showa connection between prepositions and
cases was A.-F. Bernhardi, in ANFANGSGRUNDE DER SPRACHWISSENSCHAFT,
Berlin (1805); see Hjelmslev (1934) 24.I have not yet seen the
Bernhardi work.
languages which use case forms quite extensively, andthe assumption that the case forms ofnouns can be assigned in straightforward
ways on the basis of simply defined syntactic relations seems to
be based too much on the situation with Englishpronouns.
Prepositions in English- -or the absence of a preposition
before a noun phrase, which may be treatedas corresponding to a


zero or unmarked case affix--are selected on the basis of several
types of structural features, and in ways that are exactly analogous
toth0.56 which determineparticular case forms in a language like
Latin: identity as (surface) subject or object, occurrence after
particular verbs, occurrence in construction with particular nouns,
occurrence in particular constructions, and so on.The only difficulties in thinking of these two processes as analogous are that
even the most elaborate case languages may also have combinations
of, say, prepositions with case forms, and that some prepositions
have independent semantic content.The first of these difficulties
disappears if, after accepting the fact that the conditions for
choosing prepositions are basically of the same type as those for
choosing case forms, we merely agree that the determining conditions may simultaneously determine a preposition and a case form.
The second difficulty means merely that a correct account will
allow certain options in the choice of prepositions in some contexts, and that these choices have semantic consequences.Analogous
devices are provided by the 'true' case languages, too, for example
by having alternative case choices in otherwise identical constructions, or by having semantically functioning prepositions or postpositions.
The syntactic relations that are involved in the selection of
case forms (prepositions, affixes, etc.) are?in practice, of two
types, and we may call these 'pure' or 'configurational' relations,
on the one hand, and 'labeled' or 'mediated' relations on the
other hand.43'Pure' relations are relations between grammatical
3The distinction would be more accurately represented by the
opposition 'relations' vs. 'categories', because whena


-30-
phrase-structure rule introduces a symbol like Manner or Extent,
symbols which dominate manner adverbials and extent phrases, these
symbols function, as far as the rest of the grammar is concerned,
in exactly the same ways as such 'intentional' category symbols
as S or NP.This fact has much more to do with the requirements
of the phrase-structure model than with the' categorial' character
of the grammatical concepts involved.In an earlier paper I
discussed the impossibility of capturing in a base component of
a grammar of the type presented in Chomsky(1965) both such information that in a clumsy wavy is a manner adverbial (and as such
represents an instance of highly constrained lexical selection
as well as a quite specific positional and co-occurrence potential
which it shares with other manner adverbials) and that it is a
preposition phrase.See my "Toward a modern theory of case,"
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY PROJECT ON LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS REPORT
NO. 13 (1966) 1-24.
The intention on the part of grammarians who have introduced
such terms asTemp, Extent, etc., into their rules is to let'
these terms represent relations between the phrases which they
dominate and some other element of the sentence (e.g., the VP as
a whole); nobody, as far as I can tell, has actually wished these
terms to be considered as representing distinct types of grammatical categories on the order of NP or Preposition Phrase.
constituents expressible in terms of (immediate) domination.
Thus, the notion 'subject' can be identified as the relation
between a NP and an immediately dominating S, while the notion
'direct object' can be equated with the relation that holds between
a NP and an immediately dominating VP.Where the relation 'subject
of is understood to hold between elements of the deep structure,
one speaks of the deep-structure subject; where it is understood
to hold between elements of the (pre-stylistic) surface structure,
one speaks of the surface-structure subject.This distinction
appears to correspo2A. to the traditional one between 'logical
subject' and 'grammatical subject'.
By 'labeled' relation I mean the relation of a NP to a
sentence, or to a VP, which is mediated by a pseudo-cateogry label
such as Manner, Extent, Location, Agent, etc.


-31-
It is clear that if alltransformations which create
surface subjects have the effectof attaching a NP directly
to a S, under conditionswhich guarantee that noother NP is
also directly subjoined tothe same S and if it alwaysturns out
that only one NP is subjoinedto a VP in the pre-stylisticsurface
structure, then these two 'pure'relations are exactly whatdetermine the most typical occurrencesof the case categories'nominative' and 'accusative' in languagesof a certain type.For remaining case forms, the determinationis either on the basis ofidiosyncratic properties of specific governingwords, or on the basis of
a 'labeled' relation, aswhen the choice of la is determinedby
reference to the dominating categoryExtent in the extent phrase
of sentences like (17).
(17)he missed the target by two miles
In my earlier paper (see fn.43) I pointed out that there is
no semanticallyconstant value associated with thenotion 'subject
oft (unless it is possible to make senseof the expression 'the
thing being talked about', and, ifthat can be done, to determine
whether such a concept has anyconnection with the relation'subject'),
and that there are no semanticallyrelevant relations residing in
the surface subject relationwhich are not somewhere alsoexpressible
by 'labeled' relations.The conclusion I have drawn fromthis is
that all semantically relevant syntacticrelations between NPi
and the structures which containthem must be of the 'labeled'type.
The consequences of this decision include(a) the elimination of
the category VP, and(b) the addition to some grammars of arule,
or system of rules,for creating 'subjects'.The relation 'subject',


- 32 -
in other words, is nowseen as exclusively a surface-structure
phenomenon.


-33-
2.Some preliminary conclusions
I have suggested that thereare reasons for questioning
the deep-structure validity of the traditional division between
subject and predicate, a division which is assumed bysome to
underlie the basic form of all sentences in all languages.The
position I take seems to be in agreement with that of Tesniere,
who holds that the subject/predicate division isan importation
into linguistic theory from formal logic ofa concert which is
not supported by the facts of language, and, furthermore, that
the division actually obscures the many structural parallels between
'subjects' and 'objects'.44The kinds of observations thatsome
4Tesniere (1959) 103-105.
scholars have made about surface differences between'predicative'
and 'determinative syntagms145may be accepted without in any way
45See, for example, C. E. Bazell, "Syntactic relations and linguistic typology," CAHIERS FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE, VIII (1949) 5-20;
esp. p. 8 where the difference is expressed in such terms as
'degrees of cohesion', 'liaison features' found within the predicate but not between subject and predicate.
requiring one to believe that the subject/predicate division plays
a part in the deep structure syntactic relations among the constituents of sentences.
Once we have interpreted 'subject'as an aspect of the surface
structure, claims about so-called 'subjectless' sentences in languages which have superficial subjects in some sentences, or
reports about languages which appear to lack entirely entities
corresponding to the 'subjects' of our grammatical tradition,no


longer need to be regarded as particularly disturbing.Unfortunately, there are both good and bad reasons for asserting that
particular languages or particular sentences are 'subjectless',
and it may be necessary to make it clear just what it is that I
am claiming.A distinction must be drawn between not havin% a
constituent which could properly be called 'subject', on the
one hand, and losinsuch a constituent by anaphoric deletion,
on the other hand.46Robins, in his review of Tesniere (1959),
The tagmemicists in particular, because of their notation for
'optional' constituents, have had to come to grips with this
distinction.A 'tagmemic formula' may be thought of as an attempt
to present in a single statement a quasi-generative rule for producing a set of related sentences and the surface structure(short
of free variation in word order)of these sentences.If the
formulas fortransitive and intransitive clauses are expressed
as (i) and (ii) respectively
(i) +Subj +Pred +Obj +Loc +Time
(ii) 7subj +Pred +LocTime
it is clear (0 that any clause containingAa Pred can satisfy either
of these formulas, and (b) that the potential appearance of such
constituents as Loc and Time are less relevant to the description
of these clauses than is that of the constituent Obj.Pike draws
a distinction, which cross-cutsthe optional/obligatory distinction,
between 'diagnostic' and 'non-diagnostic' elements of clauses, as,
e.g., in his recent H.E.W. report,TAGMEMIC AND MATRIX LINGUIST1C$
APPLIED TO SELECTED AFRICAN LANGUAGES (1966), esp. Chapter 1:
Clauses.Grimes, on the other hand, seems to suggest introducing
the 'diagnostic' constituents obligatorily, allowing for their
deletion under certain contextual or anaphoric conditions.See
Joseph E. Grimes, HUICHOL SYNTAX, Mouton (1964) Pp. 105, esp. 16f.
accuses Tesniere of failing to isolatethe subject from the rest
of the sentence.To Robins, Tesnik,e's decision to allow the
subject to be treated as being merely a complement to the verb
must be related to the fact that the subject is omissible in
such languages asLatin.47Ifihitrue that the omissibility of


-35-
7RH. Robins, "Syntactic analysis," ARCHIVUM LINGUISTICUM, XIII
(1961) 78-89.(Reprinted in Hamp, Householder and Austerlitz,
READINGS IN LINGUISTICS II, Chicago (1966) 386-395.)
'subjects' is what convinced Tesniere that they are subordinated
to verbs, and if the non-omissibility in any language of the subject constituent would have persuaded him that there is a special
status for 'subject' vis a vis 'predicate' in the underlying
structure of sentences in all languages, then that, it seems to
me, is a bad reason for coming up with what might be a correct
analysis.
It seems best to have a place in linguistic theory for the
operation of anaphoric processes, processes which have the effect
of shortening, simplifying, de-stressing sentences which are partly
identical to their neighbors (or which are partly 'understood').
It happens that English anaphoric processes make use of pronominalization, stress reduction, as well as deletion, under conditions
where other languages might get along exclusively withdeletion.48
For an extremely informative description of these processes in
English, see Lila Gleitman, "Coordinating conjunctions in English,"
LANGUAGE XLI (1965) 260-293; also see Zellig S. Harris, "Cooccurrence and transformation in linguistic structure," LANGUAGE
XXXIII (1957) 283-340, esp. section 16.
tinder some conditions, in languages of the latter type, the deleted
element happens to be the 'subject'.The non - occurrence of subject
nouns in some utterances in some languages is not by itself, in
other words, a good argument against the universality of the
subject/predicate division.There are better ones.Some of these


have already been suggested, othersare to appear
shortly.
By distinguishing between surface and deepstructure case
relationships, by interpreting the 'subject' and 'object'as
aspects of the surface structure, and by viewing the specific
phonetic shapes of nouns in actual utterancesas determinable
by many factors, vastly variable inspace and time, we have
eliminated reasons for being surprised at the non-comparability
of (surface) case systems.We find it partly possible to agree
with Bennett when, after surveyinga few representative nineteenth century case theories, he stated that they erred in
sharing the "doubtful assumptionthat all the cases must
belong to a single scheme, as though parts ofsome consistent institution".49We need not follow him, however, in concluding that
Bennett (1914) 3.
the only valid type of research into thecases is to determine
the earliest value of each case, takenone at a time.
Greenberg has remarked thatcases themselves cannot be compared
across languages--two case syktems may have different numbers of
cases, the names of the cases may conceal functional differences--
but that case uses may be expected to be comparable.He predicts,
for instance, that the uses of cases will be "substantially
similar in frequency but differently combined in different languages."50Greenberg's recommendations on the cross-linguistic
50Greenberg (1966) 80, 98; the quotation is fromp. 98.


-37-
study of case uses were presented in connection with the 'true'
case languages, but it seems clear that if a'Dative of Personal
Agent' in one language can be identified with an 'Ablative of Personal Agent' in another language, then the 'Personal Agent'
relationship between a noun and a verb ought also to be recognizable in the so-called 'caseless' languages on exactly the same
grounds.If, furthermore, it turns out that other grammatical
facts can be associated with sentences containing the Personal
Agent relationship, it would appear that the concepts underlying
the study of case uses may have a greater linguistic significance
than those involved in the description of surface case systems.
These additional facts might include the identification of a
limited set of nouns and a limited set of verbscapable of entering into this relationship, and whatever additinnal generalizations
prove to be statable in terms of this classification.Higher level
dependencies may be discovered, such as the limitation of Benefactive phrases to sentences containing a Personal Agent relationship in their deep structure.
The question should now be asked, of course, whether we are
justified in using the term 'case' for the kind of remote
syntactic-semantic relations that are at issue.There is among
many scholars a strong feeling that the term should beused only
where clear case morphemes are discoverable in the inflection of
nouns.To Jespersen, it is wrong to speak of 'analytic' cases,
even when there is no 'local' meaning in thepreposition phrases,
because cases are one thing and preposition-plus-object constructions


-38-
are another.51Jespersen's position is colored a little by his
51Jespersen (1924) 186.
belief that the caselessness of English represents a state of
progress for which we ought to be grateful.52
52Jespersen (1924) 179: "However far back we go, we nowhere find
a case with only one well-defined function: in every language
every case served different purposes, and the boundaries between
these are far from being clear-cut.This, in connection with
irregularities and inconsistencies in the formal elements characterizing the cases, serve to explain the numerous coalescences we
witness in linguistic history ("syncretism") and the chaotic rules
which even thus are to a great extent historically inexplicable.
isIIftheEnliWlmouLtaEs2n2farther than the others ingrate fu
simplifying these rules, we should be devoutl
our wato force it back into the disorder and com lexitof
centuries ago."talics added.
1111111m.
Cassidy, in his 1937 appeal to rescue the word 'case' from
abuse, wrote: "'Case' will be properly used and will continue to
have some meaning only if the association with inflection be
fully recognized, and if stretching of the term to include other
sorts of 'formal' distinction beabandoned."53In a similar vein,
53FrederickG. Cassidy, "'Case' in modern English," LANGUAGE, XIII
(1937) 240-245; 244.
Lehmann chides Hirt for suggesting that an awareness ofcases had
to precede the development of case endings--that there was, in
other words,"among the speakers of pre-Indo-European and Proto-
Indo-European a disposition for cases."Lehmann continues: "We
can account for Hirt's statement by the assumption that to him
a case was a notional category, whether or not it was exemplified


-39-
in a form.To us a particular case is non-existent unless it
is represented by forms which contrast in a systemwith others."54
54Lehmann (1958) 185.
The claim that syntactic relations of various types must exist
before case endings could be introduced to give themexpression
would su-'ely have gone unchallenged; what was offensive,apparently,
was the use of the word 'case'.
It seems to me that if there are recognizable intra-sentence
relationships of the types discussed in studies of case systems- -
whether these are reflected in case affixes or not--and if these
same relationships can be shown tobe comparable across languages;
and if there is some predictive or explanatory use towhich assumptions concerning the universality of these relations can beput,
then surely there can be no meaningful objection to using the
word 'case', in a clearly-understood deep-structure sense,to
identify these relationships.The dispute on the term 'case'
loses its force in a linguistics which accepts the centralityof
syntax.55
55Theuniversality of case as a grammatical category is affirmed
in Hjelmslev (1934) 1.A recent study of Velten's, from a
Jakobsonian point of view, reveals enough of the historical
continuity of 'synthetic' and 'analytic' cases to suggest that
the linguist has no right to assign cases and prepositions to
different 'chapters' of the study of grammar.(H. V. Velten,
"On the functions of French de and a," LINGUA, XI (1962) 449-
452.)The deep structure notion of cases may be thought of as
involving an extension of the synchronic concept of 'syncretism'.
The asual synchronic sense of case syncretism assume the form of
a decision to posit a case contrastthat may not be expressed
overtly in most contexts as long as it appears overtlyin "one
LIIIIIIMUNIMM11.100011.11111161ftrerrimirdiara...1.-...


-4opart of the system."(See Leonard Newmark's statement in "An
Albanian case system," LINGUA, XI (1962) 312-321; 313.)Deep
structure cases may simply be nowhere overtly reflected as
affixes or function words.The notion we are after probably
corresponds to Meinhof's' Kasusbeziehungen'.(C. Meinhof, "Der
Ausdruck der Kasusbeziehungen in afrikanischen Sprachen,"
SCRITTI IN ONORE DI A. TROMBETTI, Milano (1938) 71-85; 71.The
Meinhof reference, which I have not seen, was quoted in Henri Frei,
"Cas et deses en francais," CAHIERS FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE, XII
(1954) 29-47; fn. p. 31.)
We may agree, then, for our present purposes, with Hjelmslev,
who suggests that the study of cases can be pursued most fruitfully if we abandon the assumption that an essential characteristic
of the grammatical category of case is expression in the form of
affixes on substantives.I shall adopt the usage first proposed,
as far as I can tell, by Blake56of using the term 'case' to
56Frank Blake, "A semantic analysis of case," in CURME VOLUME OF
LINGUISTIC STUDIES (LANGUAGE Monograph No. 7) (1930) 34-49.
identify the underlying syntactic-semantic relationship, and the
term 'case form' to mean the expression of a case relationship in
a particular language--whether through affixation,suppletion, the
use of clitic particles, or constraints on word order.


- 41 -
3.Case grammar
The substantive modification to the theoryof transformational grammar which I wish to proposeamounts to a re-introduction
of the 'conceptual framework'interpretation of case systems,
but this time with a clearunderstanding of the difference between
deep and surface structure.The sentence in its basic structure
consists of a verb and one or more nounphrases, each associated
with the verb in a particular caserelationship.The 'explanatory'
use of this frameworkresides in the necessary claim that,although
there can be compound instances of asingle case (through noun
phrase conjunction), each case relationship occursonly once in
a simple sentence.57
571tfollows that whenever more than one caseform appears in the
surface structure of the same sentence(on different noun phrases),
either more than one deep-structure caseis involved or the sentence is complex.If, for example, German le` hren isdescribed as
a verb which ',takestwo accusatives', we have reasonto believe
that in the deep structure, the twoobject nouns are distinct as
to case.Often enough the language will provideevidence for the
distinction, as in the occurrence of suchpassive sentences as
das wurde mir gelehrt.
It is important to realize that theexplanatory value of a
universal system of deep-structure casesis of a syntactic and not
(merely) a morphological nature.The various permitted arrays of
distinct cases occurring in simplesentences expresses a notion of
'sentence type' that may be expected tohave universal validity,
independently of such superficial differences assubject selection.
The arrays of cases defining the sentencetypes of a language
have the effect of imposing aclassification of the verbs in the
language (according to th( sentencetype into which they may be


-42-
inserted), and it is very likely that many aspects of this
classification will be universally valid.
Case elements which are optionally associated with specific
verbs, together with the rules for forming subjects, will serve
to explain various co-occurrence restrictions.For example, in
(18) the subject is in an Agent relation to the verb, in (19)
the subject is an Instrument; and in (20) both Agent and Instrument appear in the same sentence, but in this case it is the
Agent which appears as the subject, not the Instrument.
(18)John broke the window
(19)a hammer broke the window
(20)John broke the window with a hammer
That the subjects of (18) and (19) are grammatically different explains the fact that the combined meanings of the two
sentences is not produced by conjoining their subjects.Thus (21)
is unacceptable.
(21)*John and a hammer broke the window
Only noun phrases representing the same case may be conjoined.
Similarly, the fact that only one representative of a given case
relationship may appear in the same simple sentence, together with
the generalizations on subject selection and the redundancies
which hold between cases and lexical features(e.g., between Agent
and animateness), explains the unacceptability of sentence(22).
(22)*a hammer broke the glass with a chisel
It is unacceptable, in particular, on the interpretation that both
hammer and chisel are understood instrumentally.It cannot represent a sentence containing an Agent and anInstrument, since the


- 43 -
noun hammer is inanimate.58
58Theauthor is aware that in sentence (18) one might be talking
about what John's body did as it was tossed through the window
and that in sentence (19) one might be speaking metaphorically,
personifying hammer.Under either interpretation sentence (21)
turns out to be acceptable, and under the personification interpretation, sentence (22) becomes acceptable.What is important to
realize is that these interpretations, too, are explainable by reference to exactly the same assumptions appealedto in explaining
their 'face value' interpretations.
The dependencies that can be accounted for by making these
assumptions are that the subject of an active transitive sentence
must be interpretable as a Personal Agent just in case the
sentence contains a with-phrase of Instrumental import.Apparent
exceptions to this generalization can be seen to have different
underlying structures.Sentence (23) looks like an exception, but
by attending to the effect of the word its, the essential difference between(23) and sentences (22) and (24) becomes apparent.
(23)the car broke the window with its fender
(24)*the car broke the window with a fender
Sentence (24) violates the conditions that have been discussed,
but sentence (23) is a paraphrase of sentence (25) and may be
interpreted 's having the same deep structure as (25).
(25)the car's fender broke the window
What is suggested here is that sentences (23) and (25) are
Agentless sentences containing a possessed noun as the Instrument
(the car's fender).The rules for choosing a subject allow an
option in this case: either the entire Instrument phrase may appear
as the subject(as in (25)), or the 'possessor' alone may be made


the subject, the remainder of the Instrument phrase appearing
with the preposition with (as in (23)).The second option
requires that a 'trace' be left behind in the Instrument phrase,
in the form of the appropriate possessive pronoun.A similar
explanation is suggested for such sentences as (26) and(27), which
are also interpretable as deep-structurallyidentical.
(26)your speech impressed us with its brevity
(27)the brevity of your speech impressed us
The superficial nature of the notion 'subject of a sentence' is made
apparent by these examples in a particularly persuasive way, because
in the possessor-as-subject cases, the 'subject' is not even a major
constituent of the sentence; it is taken from the modifier of one
of the major constituents.
In the basic structure of sentences, then, we find what might
be called the 'proposition', a tenseless set of relationshipsinvolving verbs and nouns (and embedded sentences, if there areany),
separated from what might be called the 'modality' constituent.
This latter will include such modalities on the sentence-as-a-whole
II
as negation, tense, mood andaspect.59ihe exact nature of the
59Thereare probably good reasons for regardingnegation, tense and
modd as associated directly with the sentence as a whole, andthe
perfect and progressive 'aspects' as features on the V.See for
a statement of this positionLyons (1966) 218, 223.
modality constituent may be ignored for our purposes.It is likely,
however, that certain 'cases' will be directly related tothe
modality constituent as others are related to the propositionitself,
as for example certaintemporal adverbs.60


-45-
VIIIINIIIMMO.N1=11111Imanumme
oIn my earlier paper I suggested that sentence adverbials in
general are assigned to the modality constituent.I now believe
that many sentence adverbs are introduced from superordinate sentences (by transformations of a type we may wish to call 'infrajections1).This possibility has long been clear for unmistakable
sentence adverbs like unfortunate a, but there are also quite convIncing reasons for extending the infrajection interpretation to
adverbs like willingly, easiLE, carefully, etc.
The first base rule, then, is (28), abbreviated to (28').
(28)Sentence - Modality + Proposition
(28')S -- Mp61
61The arrow notation is used throughout, but this should not be
interpreted as meaning that the proposal for a case grammar
requires an assumption of a left-to-right orientation of the
constituent symbols of the rewriting rules.
The P constituent is 'expanded' asa verb and one or more case
categories.A later rule will automatically provide for each of
the cases the categorial realization as NP (except for one which
may be an embedded S).In effect the case relations are represented
by means of dominating category symbols.
The expansion of P may be thought of as a list of formulas
of the form (29), where at least one case category must be chosen
and in which no case category appears more than once.
(29)P + V + C1 ++ Cn
Whether these formulas can IDE; collapsed according to the familiar
abbreviatory conventions is not at present clear.For our purposes we may simply think of P as representable by any of a set
of formulas including V + A, V + 0 + A, V + D, V + 0 + I + A, etc.
(The letter symbols are interpreted below.)


-46-
The case notions comprise a set of universal, presumably
innate, concepts which identify certain types of judgments which
human beings are capable of making on the events that are going
on around them, judgments on suchmatters as who did it, who it
happened to, what got changed, etc.The cases that appear to be
needed include:
Agentive (A), the case of the perceived instigator of
the action identified by the verb, typically animate.62
2The escape qualification 'typically' expresses my awareness that
contexts which I will say require Agents are sometimes occupied by
'inanimate' nouns like robot or 'human institution' nouns like
nation.Since I know of no way of dealing with these matters at
the moment, I shall just assume for all Agents that they are 'animate.'
Instrumental (I), the case of the inanimate force or
object causally involved in the action or state
identified by the verb.63
3Pau1 Postal has reminded me of the existence of sentences like
(i)
(i)I rapped him on the head with a snake.
The requirement that Instrumental NPs are 'inanimate' is the requirement to interpret (i) as having in its underlying structure something equivalent to with the body of a snake.The fact that there
are languages which would require mention of a stemmeaning 'body'
in this context may be considered as support for this position;
and so may the absence, pointed out by Lakoff, of sentences like(ii)
(ii)*John broke the window with himself
(See George Lakoff, "Instrumental adverbs and the concept of deep
structure," unpublished dittographed manuscript, 1967.)
Dative (D), the case of the animate being affected by
the state or action identified by the verb.
Factitive (F), the case of the object or being resulting
from the action or state identified by the verb, or
1116_


-47
understood as a part of the meaningof the verb.
Locative (L), the case which identifiesthe location
or spatialorientation of the state oraction
identified by the verb.
Objective (0), the semanticallymost neutral case, the
case of anythingrepresentable by a noun whoserole
in the action or stateidentified by the verb is
identified by the semanticinterpretation of the
verb itself; conceivably theconcept should be limited
to things which are affectedby the action or state
identified by the verb.64The term is not to be
64In Fillmore (1966) the neutral case wasunwisely and misleadingly
labeled 'ergative'.
confused with the notionDirect Object, nor with the
name of thesurface case synonymous withAccusative.
Additional cases will surely be needed.Suggestions for
adding to this list will appearin various places below.
It is important to notice that noneof these cases can be
interpreted as matched by thesurface-structure relationsSubject
or Object in anyparticular language.Thus, John is A in(29) as
much as in (30); the key,is I in (31) as well as in(32) or (33);
John is D in (34) as well as in(35) and (36); and Chicago.is L
in both (37) and(38).
(29)John opened the door
(30)the door was opened byJohn


(31)the key opened the door
(32)John opened the door with the key
(33)John used the key to open the door
(34)John believed that he mould win
(35)we persuaded Johnthat he would win
(36)it was apparent to John that he would win
(37)Chicago is windy
(38)it is windy in Chicago
The list of cases includes L, but nothing corresponding to
what might be called Directional.There is a certain amount of
evidence, as was mentioned above, that locational and directional
elements do not contrast but are superficial differences determined
either by the constituent structure or by the character of the
associated verb.An example provided by Hall (39) suggests, by
the occurrence of the pro-replacement word there, that to the
store and at the store are variants of the same entitly, determined
by the movement or non-movement character of the associatedverb.65
(39)she took him to the store and left him there
5BarbaraHall (now Barbara Hall Partee), SUBJECT AND OBJECT IN
ENGLISH, M.I.T. Ph. D. Dissertation (1965) 77.
The putative contrast between locational and directional
expressions as well as the distinction between 'optional' and
'obligatory' locative expressions, as exemplified in Hall's
examples (i) and (ii) seem to point to the difference between
elements which are 'inside the VP' and elements which are 'outside the VP'.
(i)John keeps his car in the garage
(ii)John washes his car in the garage
In our terms this would be equivalent either to determining whether
there is a difference between a L as a constituent of P and aL as
a constituent of M, orwhether there can be two L elements within
P, distinguished in terms of degree of selectivity of verbs.The
highly restricting L selects verbs like 1422, but and leave, but


not p'lish, wash and build; the weakly restricting L selects
verbs like 2.21192, wash and build, but not believe, know or want.
However this distinction is interpreted, the secondor
'outer'L is in some respects similar in its 'selectional' properties to what might be called the Benefactive case (B).B, too,
is involved in the selection of verbs in the sense that some verbs
do not accept B modification (*he is tall for you); but the restriction here may have more to do with dependentrelations between.
cases than with dependencies directly connected with the verb.It
appears, in fact, that those verbs which allow 'outer L' and B
modification are precisely those which take Agents.I have no
ideas on how these dependencies can be stated, but it would appear
that the second L and the B can appear only in sentences containing A's.
Thus the £ime directvs. regime indirect interpretation of
the difference between (iii) and (iv)
(iii)it demeure a Paris
(iv)it travaille a Paris
may have simply to do with the fact that the subject of (iv) is
actually an A.Both the specific verb and the occurrence of an
'outer L! are determined by the presence of an A.(See, in this
connection, Bazell!s discussion of Gougenheim's review of de Boer's
French syntax in C. E. Bazell, "Syntactic relations and linguistic
typology," CARTERS FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE, VIII (1949) 5-20; 10.)
,AM
I have stated that A and D are 'animate' participants in the
activity of the associated verbs, and I have also suggested that
verbs are selected according to the case environments which the
sentence provides--what I &-all refer to as the 'case frame'.
There are, then, the two problems of lexical selection, that of
the nouns and that of the verbs.Those features of nouns required
by a particular case are to be specified by obligatory rules of the
type illustrated by (39), a rule which specifies that any N in an
A,D
(39)N[i.Animate]/[ X]
A or D phrase must contain the feature C Animate].(Recall the
qualification of fn. 62.)
To take care quite generally of lexical features associated
with specific cases, we may appeal to a rule which associates
with each noun a label which identifies the case relation which


111111111=i'
it holds with the rest of the sentence.Such a rule might
associate with every noun under L the feature[+Locative], for
example.Since abstract nouns such as idea cannot serve as heads
of L expressions, they will be marked[- Locative].66
By allowing highly restricting lexical features to be associated
with given case units we have returned to that extension of
'cases' to 'adverb forms' proposed by Bopp, Wainer and Hartun7.
Some adverbs, on this view, are really nouns capable of 'takikig'
only one case form.Since deep structure cases are in fact all
'defective' to some extent, with respect to the nouns which they
accept, such a concept as inflectional scope no longer provides
a clear demarcation between 'case formsproper' and 'adverbs'.
See the discussion of this question in Hjelmslev (1935) 40.
Ammummommosr
The insertion of verbs, on the other hand, depends on the
particular array of cases, the 'case frame', provided by the
sentence.67The verb run, for example, may be inserted into the
671am adhering, in this discussion, to thePostal-Lakoff doctrine,
which I find thoroughly convincing, that adjectives constitute a
subset of verbs.See George Lakoff, ON THE NATURE OF SYNTACTIC
IRREGULARITY, Harvard Computation Laboratory, Report No. NSF-16,
Mathematical Linguistics and Automatic Translation (1965),
Appendices.
frame [A ], the verb sad into the frame [D ], verbs like
remove and epen into [0 + A ], verbs like murder and terrorize
(i.e., verbs requiring 'animate subject' and 'animate object') into
[D + A ], verbs like give into E0 + D + A ], and so on.
In lexical entries for verbs, abbreviated statements called
'frame features' will indicate the set of case frames into which
the given verbs may be inserted.These frame features have the
effect of imposing a classification of the verbs in the language.


-51-
The classification has the complexity it does not only because
of the variety of case environments possible withinP, but also
because many verbs are capable of occurring in morethan one
distinct case environment.This last fact can be represented
most directly by allowing facultative representationof cases in
the frame feature expressions.
The word open, to take a familiar example, can occur in
E0 3, as in (40) ;in C0 + A 3, as in (41) ;in [0 + I ],
as in(42); and in C0 + I + A 3, as in (43).
(40)the door opened
(41)John opened the door
(42)the wind opened the door
(43)John opened the door with a chisel
The simplest representation of this set of possibilities makes use
of parentheses to indicate the 'optional' elements.The frame
feature for open may thus be represented as(44).
(44)-1-E0 (I) (A)368
Case frames are represented in square brackets, with 'underline'
indicating the position of the element with respect to whichthe
expression is an environmental frame.A frame feature is represented in square brackets with '+' or '-' in front, indicating
that the set of case frames represented by the expression within
the brackets are those which will (if the feature is marked'+')
or which will not(if the feature is marked '-') accept the
lexical item with which the feature is associated.
Other verbs having this same feature are turn, move, rotate, bend,


IL
-52-
For a verb like kill it is necessary to indicate, expressing it in familiar terms, that it takes an animate object and
either an animate or an inanimate subject; and that if there is
an animate subject, an instrumentphrase may also co-occur.The
frame feature for kill, in other words, will have to specify that
either an Instrument or an Agent must be specified, and both may.
If the linked parentheses notation can be introduced to indicate
that at least one of the linked elements must be chosen, the
frame feature for kill can be given as (45).
(45)+[D (IA) ]
The verb murder, on the other hand, is one which requires an Agent.
Its frame feature differs from that of (44) and (45) because the
element A is obligatorily present.It is given as (46).
(46)+[D (I) A ]
The environmental subclassification of verbs is sensitive to
more than the mere array of cases in P.Since one of the cases may
be represented by S (an embedded sentence), verbs are also subclassified in terms of whether the 0 element is a sentence.By
convention we shall interpret the symbol 0 in frame features as
indicating NPs, and the symbol S as indicating an 0 to which an
S has been embedded.
The frame feature +[S ] characterizes such verbs as true,
interesting, etc.; the feature +[S + D ] is common to such
verbs as want and expect; verbspredict and cause
appear in the frame[S + A ]; and verbs like force andersuade
are insertable into the frame[S + D + A ].69


69It should be pointed out that descriptions of embedded sentences
as it + 8 realizations of thecategory NP in 'subject/object'
grammars must somehow guarantee thatthis particular expansion of
NP is limited to the subjects of intransitive sentences and the
objects (direct or oblique) of transitive sentences.All such
restrictions are rendered unnecessary by the decision tolimit
complement S to the case element 0.
are
VerbsAdistinguished from each other not only by specification
of the case frames into which they can be inserted, but also by
their transformational properties.The most important variables
here include (a) the choice of a particular NP to become the surface
subject, or the surface object, wherever these choices are not
determined by a general rule; (b) the choice of prepositions to go
with each case element, where these are determined by idiosyncratic
properties of the verb rather than by a general rule; and(c)
other special transformational features, such as, for verbs taking
S complements, the choice of specific complementizers (that, iaa,
for to, etc.) and the later transformational treatment of these
elements.
The use of parentheses in expressing the frame features,
together with the transformational introduction of subjects, makes
it possible to reduce the number of semantic descriptions in the
lexicon.The semantic interpretation of a P will introduce all
information provided by specific case relationships represented in
the P, allowing such information to be omitted from the semantic
descriptions of verbs.In the case of verbs .having the feature (44),
as we have seen, certain relatedtransitive and intransitive verbs
need not be given separate semantic description.This point may
be further demonstrated with the English verb cook.The frame


feature of cook is presumably something like (47)
(47)4-C4 (A) ]
and an idiosyncratic transformational feature of the verb is
that just in case the A is present and the 0 is some NP representing a typical NP for the verb (i.e., something like food or
a meal), the 0 element may be deleted.The semantic description
of the verb will do no more than identify a particular activity
having a result of a particular ki4d on the object identified by
the 0 element.The same semantic entry, in other words, will
account for the use of cook in all of the sentences (48) - (50).
(48)Mother is cooking the potatoes
(49)the potatoes are cooking
(50)Mother is cooking
Instead of saying that the verb has three different meanings, we
can be satisfied to say that there is a certain variety in the
case frames which accept it, and that is is one of the 'deletable
object' verbs.The fact that A is obligatorily animate and that
0 is unspecified for animateness accounts for the fact that if we
can read sentence(49) as ambiguous, it is because we can accept
certain violations of grammatical requirements in 'personifications'
of the type we have learned in nursery school, whereas if we
accept (50) as in fact ambiguous, it is because we are acquainted
with the range of activities found in human societies.
The example with cook shows that the lexicon need not contain
as many semantic entry tokens under the present proposal as it
would in a subject/object grammar.70It will now be shown that


70It may appear that facultative representation ofcases in frame
features has the advantages it does in English because there are
so many verbs which can be used transitively or intransitively in
the same form.It is a language-particular coincidence that English uses the same form in these words.The identification of
transitive and intransitive 222/2, or transitive and intransitive
cook, is justified because the semantic characterization of the
verb is the same in all of the uses discussed.(We must distinguish
between the semantic characterization ofa verb and the semantic
interpretation of sentences containing the verb.In the latter
case, all of the co-constituents and the semantic role they play
as determined by their cases are taken into account.)Wherever
that condition can be satisfied, facultative representation is
called for.It will turn out that for some languages the occurrence or non-occurrence of one of the 'optional' cases will have
an effect on the verb.If, for verbs of the type [0 (A) 3,
the appearance of the A determines a variant of the verb different from that when A is missing (distinguishing the 'transitive'
from the 'intransitive' use of the 'same' verb),or if the
absence of the A requires some additive element (e.g.,a 'reflexive' morpheme) not needed when the A is expressed, these facts
can be provided transformationally.See Mantaro J. Hashimoto,
"The internal structure of basic strings anda generative treatment of transitive and intransitive verbs,"paper read before the
1966 Tokyo International Seminar in Linguistic Theory.(By
extending the range of acceptable surface variants of verbs under
these conditions to suppletion, itmay even be possible to interpret the contrasts exemplified in (51)-(53) below as surface
lexical variation.)
this same flexibility makes it possible to ra:%duce the number of
semantic entry IzEIE, for now it is feasible to show thatsome
syntactically different words are in fact semantically identical
(with respect to that aspect of theirmeanings which are independent of the contribution of the associated cases).This may be
true for verbs like like and please, to give the example that
comes most quickly to mind.These words may be describedas
being synonymous and each having the frame feature +[0 + D ]
differing only in their subject selection features.The verb


-56 -
like, in fact, has in its history the subject selection feature
possessed by please.
The verb show, to give another kind of example, might well
have the same semantic representation as see, differing from it
only in that the frame feature for show contains an A where that
for see does not.The verbs kill and die appear to be related
in a similar way.
(51)see (+E0 + D ]) vs. show GE0 + D + A ])
(52)die( +CD ]) vs. kill (+D (I A) ])
We have seen, then, instances of synonymy where thereare
identical frame features but different subject selection features,
and instances of synonymy where there are frame feature differences
depending on whether a particular case category was presentor
absent.We may now turn to examples of synonymy where the
difference is in the choice of one case or another.
It will be recalled that both A and Dare animate.The
semantic descriptions of certain verbs may refer to the animateness of the associated noun, independently of whether the 'source'
of the animateness is A or D.That is, the semantic representation
of certain verbs may specify a relationship or a process associated
with the necessarily-animate participant in the stateor activity
identified by the verb.The relation of hear and listen to the
necessarily-animate NP is the same in both cases, the difference
in the semantic interpretation of the Ps containing them determined
by the semantic contribution of the associated cases, and by the
fact that the frames that contain hear are E0 + D ] and those
that contain listen are C0 + A ].The fact that in thecase


57 -
of listen the relationship is understood asinvolving the active
participation of the person identified as A is dueto the presence
of A, not to a special meaning of listen.The same distinction
can be seen between see and know, onthe one hand, and look and
learn, on the other.
(53)see, know(+E0 + D ]) vs. look, learn
( +E0 + A ])
This latest point leads one to those properties of English
verbs with which Lakoff associates the terms 'stative' and'nonstative'.The question we need to ask is whether Lakoff's
71George Lakoff, "Stative adjectives and verbs in English,"
Harvard Computation Laboratory, Report No. NSF-17, Mathematical
Linguistics and Machine Translation (1966) 1.1-16.
features are primitives in the lexical entries for verbs, or
whether they permit reduction to concepts of the type I have been
outlining.Lakoff has noticed that the 'true imperative', the
progressive aspect, the occurrence of Benefactive(B) phrases,
and do so substitution occur only with 'non - stative' verbs.
Lakoff's discussion suggests that one must assign 'stative' and
'non-stative' as features on verbs and then guarantee thatB
phrases are permitted only with 'non - statives'(put the other way
around, one must guarantee that the presence of a Bexpression allows
only for the selection of 'non-statives'), that the imperative
transformation can be applied only if the verb is 'non-stative'
and so on.The treatment that I prefer is implicit in what I
have already presented.The transformation which accounts for the


'true imperatives'an apply onlyto sentences containing As, and
the occurrence of B expressions(and 'Outer Ls') is dependent on
the presence of an A.The progressive aspect can only be chosen
in association with particular case frames, forexample, those
containing As.No special features indicating stativity need be
added to verbs, because (if this suggestion iscorrect) only those
verbs which occur in Ps containing As will show up inthese
sentences anyway.72
72The do-so evidence is not so easy to interpret in this way.
Still, the connection between 'non- stative' verbs and verbs that
can 'take' A is too compblling to be simply wrong.
3.5Surface phenomena
To recapitulate, our discussion so far has suggested that
the deep structure of (the propositional componentof) every
simple sentence is an array consisting of a V plus a numberof
NPs holding special labeled relations (cases) to the sentence,
where these relations are provided for categorially andinclude
such concepts as Agentive, Instrumental, Objective,Factitive,
Locative, Benefactive, and perhaps several others.Complex
sentences involve recursion through the categorySentence under
the case category Objective.Verbs are subclassified according
to the case environments which accept them, andthe semantic
characterizations of verbs relate them either tospecific case
elements in the environment or to elementscontaining features
(such as animateness) introduced as obligatory accompanimentsof
particular cases.


-59-
The present section will deal withsome of the ways in
which deep structures of the type proposed in thisessay are converted
into surface representations of sentences.The various mechanisms
involve selection of overtcase forms (by suppletion, affixation,
addition of prepositionsor postpositions), 'registration' of particular elements in the verb, subjectivalization,objectivalization,
sequential ordering, and nominalizations.
A surface case systemmay be related to the set of underlying
cases in a variety of ways.Two deep cases may be represented in
the same way in the surface structure,as when D and 0 direct
objects are both represented with the 'accusative'case in many
languages (where the determining factormay be occurrence immediately
after the verb at some stage of derivation).A and D may be represented by the same overt form, where thedetermining factor may
be the case-linked animateness.Or the superficial form ofa case
element may be determined byan idiosyncratic property of some
governing word.
The rules for English prepositionsmay look something like
this: the A preposition islE; the I prepositionis111if there is
no A, otherwise it is with; the 0 and F prepositionsare typically
zero; the B preposition is for; the D preposition is typically to;
the L and T (for Time) prepositionsare either semantically nonempty (in which case they are introducedas optional choices from
the lexicon) or they are selected by theparticular associated noun
(on the street, at thecorner (=intersection of two streets), in the
corner (of a room); on Monday, at noon, in the afternoon).Specific


-6o
verbs may have associated with them certain preposition-choice
requirements, introduced as exceptions to the abovegeneralization.73
73Theverb blame, for example, chooses('governs') for for 0 and on
for D.The 0 preposition is at for look meaning 'examine', forfor
look meaning 'seek', to for listen, etc.Changes in the original
prerowtion assignment may be brought about by transformations:the
rule:, which provide surface subjects and direct objectsdelete
prepositions (replace them by zero), and therules which form
deverbal (=desentential) nominals convert some of the original case
forms into 'genitive', either by replacing the assignedpreposition
with of, or, in some cases, removing the original prepositionand
affixing the 'geaitive' suffix.
The position of prepositions can be guaranteed either by
having the case categories re-written asPrep + NP, or by having
12E22 be one of the obligatory constituents of NP.I shall make the
former choice, though the grounds for making the decision one way
or the other are not particularly clear.The 'universal' charge:ter
of the base rules is kept intact by the assumptionthat prepositions,
postpositions9 and case affixes--semantically relevant ornot--are
all in fact realizations of the same underlyingelement, say K
(for Kasus).We may regard all of the case categories as therefore
rewritten as K + NP.
Every English sentence has a surface subject, if only formally
so.For most combinations of cases there is a 'preferred' or
'unmarked' subject choice; for some there is no actualchoice--the
subject is uniquely determined.In general the 'unmarked' subject
choice seems to follow the following rule:
(54)If there is an A, it becomes the subject;otherwise,
if there is an I, it becomes the subject;otherwise, the subject isthe 0.


Suppose, for example, that the base representation of a
particular sentence is item (55):
(55)
,000101."
/o
V
oNKNP
dN
1I
pastopen 0thedoor
Since the sentence contains only one case category, it is obligatorily moved to the front (and hence directly subjoined to the
category S) where it will later undergo subject-preposition deletion.
There is a stage, in other words, where the form of the sentence in
question is that represented in (56).
(56)
KNP
1
0thedoorpastopen
The subject-preposition deletion rule removes the preposition and
deletes the case label.After application of the subject-preposition deletion rule, the form of the sentence is that represented
in (57).


-62-
(57)s
.....-----i----___
.,...---:
m
N
1i
thedoorpastopen
The final surface form, shown in (58), results from incorporation
of the tense into the verb.
(58)
NPP
Nd V
I 1 1
thedooropened
For a base configuration containing an A a distinction must be
made between the 'normal' and the 'non-normal'74choice of subjects.
The choice of terms is not to be taken seriously.
The choice of the A as the subject, in accordance with the rule
proposed in (54) above, requires no modification of the verb.The
changes from (59) to (60) represent subject-fronting, those from
(60) to (61) show subject-preposition deletion, and those from
(61) to (62) indicate the effect of a third rule, object-preposition
deletion.75The eventual surface structure of the sentence whose deep
75Verbs are categorized according to whether theydblete the preposition of the following case category, i.e., whether they 'take on'
a direct object.The object-preposition deleting property of a
verb may be modified by a transformation.


structure is (59) is(63).
(59)
past
(6o)
-63-
0
9\
give 0thebooks
NPNP
tomy brother byJohn
NP
by
(61)
Johnpast
NPKNP
I I
tomybrothergive re;thebooks
NP
Johnpast
V
1
NP
titP
give0thebookstomybrother


(62)
NP
John
(63)
NP
S
M
- 64 -
pastgivethebooks
V
1
Johngave
NPD
d
mybrother
1
KNP
thebookstomybrother
If it is noted that the verb ial is one which, withA as subject,
allows either 0 or D to become the directobject, an alternative
surface form for (59) is(64) (assuming that case-label deletion
occurs when zero K elements are'deleted').
(64)
NP
NP
dN
Johngavemybrother
dN
I I
thebooks
The Inormal9 choice of subject for sentencescontaining an A,
as stated in generalization(54) (which is a generalization for


-65-
English) is the A.The verb 'ye also allowseither 0 or D to
appear as subject as long asthis 'non - normal' choice is 'registered'
in the V.This"registeringl of a 'non-normal' subject takes place
via the association of the feature[ +Phssit.e] with the V.This
feature has three effects; the V loses its object-preposition
deletion property, it loses its ability to absorb thetense (requiring the automatic insertion of a be in the Mconstituent), and it
must now be filled by a special 'passive' form(i.e., given).The
sequence (65) to(68) develops the choice of 0 as subject; the sequence
(69) to (73) shows the result of choosing D as subject.
(65)
K
0
(66)
7,7/`_
Ei-Pasj
K1 iNP
KNP
d
thebookspast givetomybrotherbyJohn
dN
thebooks
[44
V A
KNP
d
1
pastgivetomy
y
brotherbyJohn


(67)
-66-
thebooks
(68)
(69)
[PassV
NPKNP
d
///'N
givemybrother byJohn
thebooks were
KNP
I
tomybrother
(70)
dN
my
S
1
M
past
given
[PassV
.....
give
brotherpastgive
_,...),1'1glp
I I
I
d
7my brother byJohn
.............0A
K I[NP
I1
N
I I
0thebooksbyJohn
P
NPKNP
0thebooksbyJohn


(71)
-67-
NP
dN
brother
(72)
my
(73)
brother
M
:fq
I
KNPNP
dN
1
past be give0thebooksbyJohn
S
A
+Pass
dNKNP
past be givethebooksbyJohn
S
[Pass'
Mane.
NP
1
K
T
mybrotherwasgiventhebooksbyJohn
We have seen that where thereis only one case category,its
NP must serve as the surfacesubject.Elramples (59) to (73) have
shown ways of dealingwith sentences containing morethan one case
category where one designated casecould provide the subjectwithout effecting any changein the V, or others coulddo so as long
as a 'record'of this decision wasattached to the V.
For many of the verbswhich 'take more than one casecategory,
the one which contributesthe subject is indicatedby the verb


-68-
itself.Of the verbs which are acceptedinto the frame C0 + D
please, belong, interesting,etc., choose 0 assubject, like, want,
think, etc., choose D.76
714,smentioned above, by regardingthe differences here asrepresenting no more thanidiosyncratic facts about thesyntactic properties
of these verbs, we canaccept historical changes likethose with like,
want and think, from verbsof the type which chme0 to verbs of the
type which choose D, to bemerely a matter of detailin the subjectselection processes in our language.In other words, we do notneed
to agree with Jespersenwhen he describes thechange in English from
the use of ekpressions ofthe type him like oystersto those of the
type he likes oysters asreflecting a change in the'meaning' of the
verb like from something like"to be agreeable to" tosomething like
"to take pleasure in"(Jespersen 1924) 160).The change seems merely
to be a result of theinter-influencing of the two surfaceprocesses
of choosing the first wordand establishing verbalconcord.
Sometimes subjects are created notby moving one of the case
elements into the 'subject'position, but by copying aparticular
element into that position.This seems to be a consequenceof the
positional treatment of subjectsin English and seems to berelated
to the use of purely formalsubjects.77
77From the fact that there mayonly be one case in asimple sentence,
it becomes possible toallow all subjects to beformed by a copying
transformation.Sentences with two copies of the sameNP in the same
case undergo oneof a number of changes:the second copy iseither
deleted or replaced by apro-form, or the first copyis replaced by
a pro-form.
Copying for pro-replacement canbe illustrated withthat-clauses.
The 'verb' true occurs in theframe [S], i.e., in the configuration
(74).


-69-
Since there is only one case element, it is obligatorily the subject.The context requires that the complementizer that be provided
for the embedded sentence.By subject copying, (76) is derived from
(75).
pres
V0
truethat John likes Mary
Marythat John likes Mary pres truethat John likes Mary
The structure of (76) undergoes either second-copy deletion, yielding (77), or first -copy pro-replacement, giving us(78).
S
S
that John likes Marypres
V
I
true


-70-
(78)
0 M
it
1\
0
t
pres betruethat John likes Mary
Verbs expressing meteorological conditions have the frame
feature +[L 1.Choosing hot in that frame, we can construct
the sentence wh -se deep structure is represented by (79).From (79)
we get, by subject copying, item(80).By second copy deletion (and
subject preposition deletion) item (80) becomes (81); on the other
hand, if the first copy is replaced by its pro-form (in this context,
it), the resulting sentence is (82).78
781tis likely that the correct analysis of subject copying is a little
different from this.There is considerable evidence that when the
first copy is replaced by its pro-form, the second copy is actually
outside of P, that is, that it is 'extraposed' in the sense ofRosenbaum.
If this Is true, then since the sentences having undergone extraposition
must be created in two steps anyway, it is likely that the sentential
subjects are formed in the usual way--not by copying--and thatthey
are later extraposed, leaving behind,in the subject position, a
'trace' in the form of expletive it.
The examples and the analysis of meteorological vabs are adapted
from D. Terence Langendoen, "Some problews concerning theEnglish
expletive 'it'," THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION,PROJECT
ON LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS, REPORT NO. 13 (1966), 104-134.
(79)
MP
V
preshot
KNP
inthestudio


(8o)
- 71 -
(81)
NPM
thestudiois
V
111
inthestudiopreshot
(82)
V
hot
it
KNP
ishotinthestudio
Under certain conditions, a first-copy L may bereplaced by
an expletive there.The case frame [0 + L ] may be filled
by a blank verb (i.e.,zero).This situation (of verblesssentences)
may call for theintroductionof the element be into the M constituent, which is a process we have already seento be necessary for
verbs which are adjectives as well as forverbs which have been
modified through addition of the feature[I-Passive].For verbless


sentences of the typer_
- 7 2 -
0 + L ], the 'normal' subjectchoice
is 0.Thus, from (83) we get(84), and eventually (85).
(83)
pres
(84)
K
KNPKNP
I
0manytoysinthebox
0 manytoys
V L
,-----s,
KNP
dN
I I
pres0inthebox
(85)S
,./...1.--NTP4**,.
M L
1 1I
I
dN
I
dN K--------------.6ITP
manytoysareinthebox
An alternative subject choice,through subject-copying, is the
L.Thus, from (83) we might get(86).


(86)
L
gP
dN
inthe
13
boxpres
1I
00 manytoysinthebox
The pro-form for L inverbless sentences isexpletive(unstressed)
there.The result of modifying(86) by pro-replacement ofthe
subject L is(87); extraposition of thesecond-copy L, assuggested
in fn. 78, has beencarried out in(87).
(87)
therearemany
ct
boxtoysinthe
Alternatively to replacingthe first-copy L byexpletive there is
to retain the LNP as subject.This decision requiresthe regular
pronominalization of therepeated NP.It further requiresmodification of the verb:the hitherto emptyV position is filledwith the
function verbhave.79Since have is a V, itis capable ofabsorbing
79For a recent argument onthe transformationalintroduction of be
and have in allof their occurrences, seeEmmon Bach, "Have andbe,"
LANdrrfft, forthcoming.For a more adequatetreatment of existential
sentences than I havepresented, see especiallyP. Gregory Lee,"Some
properties of besentences," 1967 forthcoming.


- 74 -
the tense, making the addition of be to M no longer necessary.The
result of choosing the first L as subject results, throughsubjectpreposition deletion, have-insertion, object-preposition deletion,
repeated NP pronominalization, and tense affixation, in(88).
(88)
NP
dN
thebox
VNPL
d.NKNP
hasmanytoysinit
The general position I am taking on the verb have is that in
verbless sentences (i.e., when the V constituent is present but
lexically empty), have is obligatorily inserted just in case the
subject is a NP which is not from the case O.The most obvious case
is that of the empty verb in the frame[0 + D ],a context
which in English requires D to be the subject, resulting inthe
typical have sentences.Other languages, e.g., French, seem to have
contexts in which the subject choice is optional--situationswhere
X a Y is in a paraphrase relation with Y est a X.Other languages,
e.g. Estonian, do nc1t have anythingequivalent to the verb have.80
0Another situation for introducing have, accounting for connections
between such pairs of sentences as(177;nd (ii), are discussed below
in the section on inalienable possession.
(i)my knee is sore
(ii)I have a sore knee
Some languages have subjectivalization processes; and, as Ihave
suggested for English, there seems to be ananalogous objectivalization


75
IND
process which has the superficial effect of bringing aparticular nominal element into closer association with the verb.
The formal rather than purely notional character of the direct
object was noticed by Jespersen.His examples show intra-language
paraphrase relations like that between (89) and (90), and crosslanguage differences like that between (91) and (92).
(89)present something to a person
(90)present a person with something
(91)furnish someone with something
(92)fournir quelque cho se a quelqulun81
81Jespersen (1924) 162.
When such phenomena were examined by Hall, she took one form as
basic, the other as derived.'Derived subjects', in her analysis,
are possible just in case there is no 'deep subject';'derived
objects', on the other hand, have the effect of displacing the original deep structureobject and attaching a with to it.Her
examples include (93)-(94) and (95)-(96).
(93)John smeared paint on the wall
(94)John smeared the wall with paint
(95)John planted peas and corn in his garden
(96)John planted his garden with peas and corn
Hall provides rules which move the locative element (the wall or his
garden of (93) and (95) respectively) into the direct object posi-
Va
tion by a transformation which also attaches with to the former
direct object.


-A7-
From the point of view taken here, it would be just as easy to
say that both onthe wall and with paint were initially provided
with prepositions (as L and I case elements), the verb smear
having the property that whichever of these elements is chosen as
'direct object' is drawn next to it and loses its preposition.
(In other languages, the process might be expressed as converting
an original case specification to laccusative'.)82
2There are semantic difficulties in treating subject and object
transformitionally, in the sense that different choices are often
accompanied by semantic differences of one sort or another.These
differences are more on tne order of 'focusing' - -to be as vague as
possible--than anything else, and do not seem to require positing
'subjects' and 'objects' in the deep structure.The 'focusing'
difference may be extremely slight, as in the pairs (i)-(ii) and
(iii)-(iv), or it may have somewhat more 'cognitive content' as in
the pairs (v)-(vi) and (vii)-(viii).
(i)Mary has the children with her
(ii)the children are with Mary
(iii)he blamed the accident on John
(iv)he blamed John for the accident
(v)bees are swarming in the garden
(vi)tht garden is swarming with bees
(vii)he sprayed paint on the wall
(viii)he sprayed the wall with paint
Sentence (vi) seems to suggest, while (v) does not, that the whole
garden has bees in it everywhere; and (viii) suggests, while(vii) does
not, that the entire wall got covered with paint.
To the extent that other grammars make use of derived subjects
and derived objects--which is the only alternative, within subject/
object grammars, to treating verbs like luma, blameopen, break,
etc. as involving elaborate and unexplained examples of homonymy- -
the semantic difficulties are just as great for them as they are
for case grammar.Since the 'semantic effect' of the transformations in question is so different in kind from the semantic role of
the case relations themselves, and since the latter are not affected
by these processes, I am inclined to tolerate the re-introduction into
grammatical theory of transformations which have semantic import(of
this highly restricted kind).
Subjectivalization, where it occurs, results in a neutralization
of underlying case distinctions to a single form, usually called the


-77-
'nominative'.Objectivalization, where it occurs, neutralizes case
distinctions to a single form which, where it is distinct from the
form assigned to subjects, is traditionally termed 'a:cusativel.
A third process which has the effect of effacing deep-structure
case distinctions is the formation of nominals from sentences.The
case modifications under nominalization transformations usually involve
what is called the 'genitive'.
The brief mention above of situations in which there was an S
embedded to the case category 0 suggested the ways in which case
grammar must deal with verb and adjective complementation.A
second source of embedded sentences is within the NP itself.The
rule for NP may be stated as (97).
(97)NP--- N (S)
Where the N is an ordinary lexical item and the adjunct S contains
a co-referential copy of the same N, the result is a NP consisting of
a noun modified by a relative clause.One of the most obvious sources
of 'genitive' is from relative clauses built on sentences which, by
themselves, would have assumed the form X has Y.The N in the modified NP is the same as the N contained in the D of the adjunct sentence, and the V is empty.Thus, from (98) we get (99) by deleting
the repeated noun, the tense, and the 'empty' verb, and reattaching
the D to the dominating NP.


-78 -
(98)NP
N P
K
7
bookspres00bookstoJohn
(99)NP
toJohnbooks
A D subjoined to a NP has its case marker modified--inthis case to
the sibilant suffix.Note (100).
(100)NP
D N
NP
I
John'sbooks
The 'true possessive' construction--resulting either in a
NP of the form X's Y or Y of X in English--has as its source a
sentence whichby itself would have the form X hasY.The fact
that in some languages there are instancesof adnominal D not modified
to the 'genitive' (dery Vater seinHaus, 'Dative of Possession')
supports the view that conversion togenitive is a matter of the
surface structure.


-79-
The treatment of de7erbal nouns which seems mostsatisfactory
to me is that, except for the purelyproductive cases, the derivation of a noun from a verb is a matterof historical not synchronic
fact.The synchronic reality is expressed byindicating that a
given noun has a particular kind ofrelationship to a specific verb
(or set of verbs), and that some of these nouns may,others must,
appear in the NP frame[2 ].
That is, instead of having a synchronic processfor producing
such words as Latin amor from its associatedverb, wnat is needed
is the classification of such a word as anabstract noun having a
particular kind of relationship with theverb amo.83Nouns having
3Thistreatment allows for the inclusion of nounswhich lack
etymological connections with their related verbs.We might wish
to indicate for book a connection of theintended kind with the verb
write, thus accounting for the ambiguity of yourbook between the
book which you own (ordinary relative clause modification)and the
book which You wrote.
this kind of special relationship to specificverbs can take part in
a process whichintroduces into the NP elements which'originally'
depended on the associated verb.The processes in question frequently have the effect of converting the formof the subsidiary NPs
to the genitive.84Thus the noun amor when qualified by a sentence
TrExactly what universal constraints there are, if any, onthe
element to be converted to genitive is not atall clear.It appears
that if there is only one element that shows upin the NP, it
frequently takes the genitive form.Compare the ambiguous sentence
(i) with sentences (ii) and (iii).
(i)my instructions wereimpossible to carry out
(a) so I quit
(b) so he quit
(ii)my instructions to you areto go there


(iii)*my your instructions are to go there
In English it appears that if the conditions which allow the form
of the of-genitive and the s-genitive are satisfied by two different
NPs in the associated sentence, multiple genitive constructions
become possible, as in the following example borrowed from Jespersen.
(iv) Gainsborough's portrait of the duchess of Devonshire
Japanese allows conversion to genitive in true relative clauses,
as well as in the reduced relative clauses.A paraphrase of (v) is
(vi); no is the postposition most closely associated with functions
which we would call 'genitive'.
(v)boku ga yonda zasshi 1I+subject+read-past+magazine1
"the magaiines I read"
(vi)boku no yonda zasshi
of the form deus amat...yields amor dei; when qualified by a
sentence of the form deum amat ...the result is again amor dei.
The D and 0 forms, in other words, are equally reduced to the genitive, resulting when only one noun is involved, in potential
ambiguities.85
Jespersen's suggestion that the ambiguity of amor dei is in the
verb rather than the noun--the noun unambiguously identifying the subject, the verb being ambiguously either active or passive--must be
understood as the hypothesis that only those NP constituents which are
capable of conversion to surface subjects (with a given verb) may
appear under genitive modification as modifiers of the deverbal
noun.For English this may well be true.(Jespersen (1924) 170).


4.0.,Some remarks on language typology
The view of universal grammarwhich is emerging is something
like this: In their deep structure,the propositional nucleus of
sentences in all languagesconsists of a V and one or moreNPs,
each having a separate caserelationship to the P(and hence to
the V).The most straightforward deepstructure commonalities
between languages are to be soughtat this 'deepest' level.
The lexical insertion rule for verbs issensitive to the
particular array of cases in theP.Since no distinction is needed
between 'strict subcategorizationfeatures' and at least thehighest
level of 'selectional features'(because redundancy relations exist
between cases and some lexicalfeatures, and because thereis no
'subject' outside of a 'VP' whosefeatures need to be dealt' with
separately), the lexical insertion rule forverbs can be a strictly
local transformation whichresponds to nothing more thanthe cases
which are co-constituents ofV (with the exception, as notedabove,
that it must be known whetherthe 0 element is a NP or aS).
The criteria for typologicalclassification that have suggested
themselves so far in this study arethese:
I.the presence or absence ofmodifications on the NPs as
determined by the deep casecategories
A.the nature of such modification(prepositional,
affixal, etc.)
B.the conditions for the choiceof particular case forms
(which, when stated in their simplestform, constitute


what is usually formulated as the 'case system'of
the language)
the presence or absence of concordial modifications
of the verb
A.the nature of the concord (number agreement,incorporation of 'traces' of case categories, feature
changes on V, etc.)
B.the relation to sublect selection(topicalization)
III.the nature of anaphoric processes
A.type of process (replacement by pro-form,deletion,
g
destressing, replacement by unstressed variants,etc.)
B.conditions of application
IV.topicalization processes (where 'subject selection' may
be thought of as a special case oftopicalization)
A.formal processes (fronting, modifying the caseform,
etc.)
B.the variety of topicalization processes inthe same
language
V.word order possibilities
A.fa0:4-;ors determining 'neutral' word order(nature of
case categories, 'ranking'of noun classes, topic
selection, etc.)
B.conditions determining or constraining stylistic
variations on word order.
It is important to realize that all of thesetypological criteria
are based on superficial processes,and that there are no particularly
Lb,good reasons for believing a priorithat there will be much coincidence


-83 -
in the ways in which the different criteria sort out theworld's
languages.
4.1The bases for determining case forms
The forms of the NPs in a P are determined on the basis of a
variety of factors, one of which is the case category of theNP.
Thus a NP under I (i.e., an instrumental noun) is assigned a particular form depending in whole or in part on the fact that it is
under I.
Surface case forms of NPs are most elaborately developed in
the personal pronouns.The study of the 'case' aspects of pronoun
systems reveals a great deal about the variety of relationships
that can hold between deep and surface cases.
Sapir's typological distinctions for Amerindian pronominal
systems86can be expressed in case - grammarterms quite simply.
86Edward Sapir, review of C. C. Uhlenbeck's "Het passieve karakter
van het verbum transitivum of vanhet verbum actionist in talen van
Noord-Amerika," in INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS, I
(1917) 82-86.
INV
If we ignore whatever complications may exist in 'passive' constructions, and if we ignore all deep structure cases exceptA and 0, we
can imagine sentences of thefollowing three types given in their
underlying propositional form):
(a)V + Aintransitive sentences with active 'subjects'
(b)+ 0 + Atransitive sentences with agents
(c)V + 0intransitive sentences with inactive
'subjects'


- 84 -
Since the V element is constant to the formulas, we can represent
these three sentence types by presenting the case frames inthree
lines, as follows:
(101)A
0 A
0
According to Sapir, then, there are languages which, like
Yana, have only one form for pronouns in all four of these
positions.
(102).
There are languages like Paiute that have a separate form for
the 0 element in the transitive sentence, all others being the
same.The two forms are traditionally called 'nominative' and
'accusative'.
(103)
accusative0A4.- nominative
There are languages like Chinook which give one form to theA
of transitive sentences, another to the remaining cases.The
terms 'ergative' and 'nominative' are often given to a distinction
made in this way.
(104)
nominativemo ergative


-85-
There are languages like Dakota which have separate forms for
A and 0; here the terms are usually 'active' and 'inactive'.
(105 )
active
And, lastly, there is the situation found in Takelma, whichhas
one form for the pronominalNP of intransitive sentences, and two
separate forms for the A and 0 of transitivesentences.Thus:
(106)
What these observations are intended to suggest is merely
that if I correctly understand Sapir's analysis ofthe pronominal
systems of these languages, then the case conceptsI have been
discussing, together with the notion of clause typeswhich various
arrays of them define, providethe categorial and configurational
information for determining the surface distinctions that arefound
in these languages.
4.2Verbal concord
There are these various ways, and possibly more, in which
cases and case environments areinvolved in determining the case


-86-
forms of NPs within a P.An additional factor is whether the
given NP has been chosen as subject in languages having subjectivalization processes.Choosing subjects or topics is related to
another aspect of the superficial structure of sentences, and that
is verbal concord.
The choice of subject in English always has the effect of
determining number concord (on those verbal and auxiliary elements
capable of reflecting number concord).Apart from number concord,
the choice of subject might involve modification of the verb to its
passive form, or introduction of the verb have.
The information 'registered' in the V may have only to do with
the choice of subject, as in English, or it may be more elaborate.
Languages which 'incorporate' pronominal affixes into the V may do
so for more than one NP at a time; or noun stems themselves from
particular cases may be incorporated into the verbal expression.87
7Grammaticaldevices for providing concord of this type have been
worked out for subject and object incorporated pronominal prefixes
in Mohawk by Paul M. Postal.See his "Mohawk prefix generation,"
PROCEEDINGS OF THE NINTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF LINGUISTS,
Mouton (1963), 346-355.
The subject selection rules discussed for English may be
compared with the topicalization processes that are described for
%IN
Philippine languages.The situation for Maranao has recently been
described by licKaughan.One NP is chosen as topic for every sentence,
and this choice is recorded in the following way: its original case
preposition is replaced by so, and an affix is inserted into the V
which indicates the case category of the chosen NP.There is


apparently considerable freedom in the choice of topic.To take the
verb meaning 'to butcher' (/sombali9/), we find that when the topic
noun is an original I, the verb takes on the prefix /i-/, as shown in
(108); and when the topic is an original B, the suffix /-an/ is
added to the V, as seen in (109).
(107)somombali9 so mama, sa karabao
'the man butchers the carabao'
(108)isombali9 o mama9 so gelat ko karabao
'it is with the knife that the man butchers the carabao'
(109)sombal9an o mama9 so majoir sa karabao
'it is for the mayor that the man butchers the
carabao188
Howard McKaughari, "Overt relation markers in Maranao, " LANGUAGE,
XXXVIII (1962) 47-51.The examples and the description of the
relationships are from McKaughan, but a great deal of guessing lies
behlnd my interpretation.
The choice of sentence subjects, or 'topics', from particular
casas appears to be the most satisfactory way of accounting for the
many types of voice modifications of verbs such as those described
as middle, pseudo-reflexive, etc., in the Indo-European languages.
4.3Anaphoric processes
Anaphoric processes are best understood from the point of view
of an extended concept of sentence conjunction.That is, every
language has ways of simplifying sentences connected by conjunction
or subjunction)and the processes used under these conditions seem
to be exactly the same as those used in sentences connected in


discourse.The grammarian's job, therefore, is to describe these
processes as they work in fully independently intelligible
sentences, and then to assume that the utterances that occur in
connected texts or conversations can best be understood from the
point of view of a shared knowledge of the language's anaphoric
processes on the part of speaker and hearer.89The fact that in
In other words, the grammarian will describe the process by which
(i) in converted to (ii) by noting the conditions under which repeated
elements in conjoined sentences may undergo deletion and pro-replacement and under which conjoined sentences can have words like too and
either added to them.
(i)Mary didn't want any candy and Mary didn't take any
candy
(ii)Mary didn't want any candy and she didn't take any,
either
In contexts in which the information contained in the first conjunct
of (i) is already understood by the addressee (by having just been
spoken by him, for example), a speaker of English feels free to use
the reduced form (iii).
(iii)she didn't take any, either
There is no reason, it seems to me, to expect the grammar of a language to generate sentences like(iii) directly.
these anaphoric or reduced forms English uses pro-replacement under
conditions that would call for deletion in some other language may
thus be seen as a superficial difference between the two languages.
The point is important--and it was mentioned above in connection with 'bad' reasons for rejecting the universality of the
subject/predicate division--because the absence of subjects in the
final surface forms of sentences in some languages is seen by many
scholars as having great typological relevance.The optional absence
of NP constituents in languages with person-marker incorporation
(e.g. Chinook) has led scholars to claim that such languages lack
the nexus relations that Europeans understand as 'subject' and 'object'


but have insteadwhat are described as 'appositional'relations
between NPs and Vs.90In languages without pronominal incorporation,
90See, e.g., the statement in Alf Sommerfelt, "Sur la notion dusujet
en georgian," MELANGESDE LINGUISTIQUE ET DE PHILOLOGIE OFFERTS A
JACQUES VAN GINNEKEN, Paris (1937) 183-185.
a distinction is made by somescholars between true subject/predicate
languages and those in which the so-called 'subject'is as much a
'complement' to the V as is the direct object or any ofthe various
adverbial elements.To Martinet, a subject is different from a
complement only if it is "constitutive of the minimalutterance"- -
that is, only if it is obligatorily present in bothfull and anaphorically reduced utterances.91In Japanese, the 'minimal utterance'
=1,11,..11M
9'AndreMartinet, A FUNCTIONAL VIEW OF LANGUAGE, Oxford-Clarendon
(1962), 61-62.
lacksa subject, and hence, theargument goes, Japanese sentences lack
the subject/predicate structure of sentences in our morefamiliar
languages.To Martinet's disciple Saint-Jacques, this typological
'fact' about Japanese is regarded as excessively important.It is
only by dint of considerable intellectual effort thatthe Westerner
can achieve that liberation fromfamiliar ways of thinking about
language which ic required for an understanding ofthe true character
of Japanese.Or so Saint-Jacques tells us.92It seems to me that
92Bernard Saint-Jacques, ANALYSE STRUCTURALE DE LASYNTAXE DU
JAPONAIS MODERNE, Paris-Klincksieck (1966) Pp 121; 36.


language typology offers enough genuine excitements to make it
possible for us to give this one up.The intellectual achievement
of which M. Saint-Jacques speaks is that of knowing that when there
is an 'understood' NP to deal with, some people replace it by a
pronoun, others get rid of it.
4.4Topicalization
The fourth criterion has to do with topicalization processes,
devices for isolating one constituent of a. sentence as 'topic', of
bringing one particular constituent of a sentence into some kind of
'focus'.Where topicalization is distinct from processes for
'emphasizing' a constituent, we have much the same thing as what
have been calling 'subjectivalizationl, but which I shall now begin
calling 'primary topicalization'.Primary topicalization for English
involves position and number concord; stylistic changes involving
stress assignment, late word order changes, and possibly the 'cleftsentence construction', fall into what might be called 'secondary
topicalization?.From what I understand of McKaughan's account,
primary topicalization in Maranao involves replacement of the original
preposition associated with a noun by so and introduction into the V
of an associated case indicator, while secondary topicalization
involves moving an NP to which so has been added to the front of the
sentence.93One might refer to Oertel's study of the disjunct use
a
93McKaughan (1962) 47f.
of cases in Brahmanic prose as a study of secondary topicalization.94


- 91 -
Hanns Oertel, THE SYNTAX OF CASES IN THENARRATIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE
PROSE OF THE BRAHMANAS9 Heidelberg(1936) Pp. 364.Oertel distinguishes
'pendent' uses of edisjunet case, wherethe 'topic' is in the 'nominative' even if its original role in thesentence was not that of
subject (comparable, I assume, to he inhe, I like him), and "proleptic' uses, where the topic retains theoriginal case form, is moved
to the front of the sentence, and may or maynot be resumed (in the
form of a demonstrative) in the remainderof the sentence (comparable
to him in him, I like(him)).
I would imagine that all languages possess some meansof carrying out
'secondary topicalization', but it may bethe case that some lack
the process of 'primary topicalization'Osubjecti.valization0.95
95Jeffrey Gruber's recent study of topicalization in child language
suggests that ontogenetically, motivated(what I am calling 'secondary') topicalization precedes the use of formal subjects inEnglish.
It may be that when one device for topicalization becomes'habitual',
it freezes into a formal requirement andthe language must then call
on other processes formotivated topicalization. (See Jeffrey Gruber,
"Topicalization in child language," FOUNDATIONS OFLANGUAGE, III
(1967).)Kenneth Hale reports that for Walbiri, an
'ergative' language of aboriginal Australia,there is apparently no
'subjectivalization' process, but any constituent maybe repeated
to the right of the proposition, the elementinside the proposition
being replaced by a pro-form.(Correspondence, 1967).
The notion 'subjectivalization' is useful only ifthere are
sentences in a language which offer achoice of subject.Languages
described as not having passives, or languagesdescribed as only
capable of expressing transitive sentencespassively, apparently
lack the grammatical process of primarytopicalization.
This question leads naturally to the problem ofthe so-called
'ergative' languages.Recall that in the accusative type of pronominal
system, the pattern was


-92-
init
and thatAthe ergativetypepas
Now when languages of the accusativetype have passive versions
of sentences whose propositionalform is [V 0 A], the case forms
associated with the elements inthe passive version are generally
'nominative' for the 0 and 'agentive'(realized as ablative, instrumental, or what have you, depending onthe language) for the A.If
passive sentences were introducedinto our three-line diagrams and
their active counterparts removed, wewould get the pattern
nominativeagentive
which is exactly like that forthe regular assignment of casesin
the ergative languages.This fact, plus the use of the term
' nominative' forsubject-of-intransitive-cum-object-of-transitive
in these languages, has led manyscholars to identify the ergative
case in ergativelanguages with the agentive caseform found in
passive sentences in accusativelanguages, and to conclude thatthe
ergative languages are really 'passive'languages, languages in which
transitive sentences can only beexpressed passively.96For both of


-93-
96Note that even if there is a different form for the verb in
0 ] and [0A ] case frames, this cannot be interpreted
as evidence of 'passivity'.As mentioned earlier, in languages not
of the ergative type there may still be systematic variation of the
same verb root depending on whether it is used transitively or
intransitively.
these systems, the case that has been given the name 'nominative' is
frequently described as the 'subject' in a subject/predicate construction, and the 'ergative' element in the one instance and the
'accusative' element in the other are treated as verbal complements.97
97See,e.g., the statement in Nikolai S. Trubetzkoy, "Le rapport entre
le determine, le determinant et le defini,"MELANGES DE LINGUISTIQUE,
OFFERTS A CHARLES BALLY, Geneva (1939) 75-82.
The difficulty of determining the !subject' in ergative languages has
been described by Martinet.Some scholars identify as subject the
word which would be the subject in a translation of the sentence
into French--i.e., the nominative in intransitive sentences and the
ergative in transitive sentences.Others regard the nominative as the
subject in all sentences, thus giving transitive sentences a 'passive'
interpretation.Lafon gives up on transitive sentences--he uses the
term 'subject' only for intransitive sentences, saying of transitive
sentences that they have no subject.98
9Andre Martinet,Le sujet comme fonction linguistique et l'analyse
syntaxique du Basque," BULLETIN DE LA SOCIETE DE LINGUISTIQUE DE
PARIS (1962) 73-82; 78f.
.,111
Valliant, on the other hand, spoke of the northern Caucasian
languages as having three types of verbs (i)true intransitives,


- 94 -
with subjects in the 'nominative'; (ii) 'operative pseudo -
transitives', with 'pseudo-subject' in the 'ergative'; and (iii)
'affective pseudo- transitives', with 'pseudo-subjects' in the
'dative'.99It seems quite clear that what he is dealing withare
9Vaillant (1936) 93.
sentences having Ps of the three types CV 0], [V 0 A] and [V 0 D],
where the surface cases for 0, A and D are 'nominative', 'ergative'
and 'dative' respectively.It looks very much as-if that is all there
is to say.For my part I would much rathar say of the ergative languages that they lack subjectivalizatio5 that all transitive sentences
undergo obligatory passivization, or that some of t!leir sentences
contain true subjects while others do not.
It is very frequently claiued that the ergative languages are
more primitive than the accusative langiiages,DOOand with the
10()See,e.g., Tesniere (1959) 112.
assumption that the ergative construction is really a passive construction, this has led such scholars as KurOowicz, Schuchardt, and
Uhlenbeck, to assume that the passive construction represents a more
primitive concept in the evolution of language than that of the
active transitive construction.Evidence mustered for this position
includes the signs that pre-Indo-European was of the ergative type,
and the fact that some languages have 'invented' have-like verbs in
relative recent times.The invention of have made it possible to
give active expression to certain tense or aspectual forms which had


- 95
remained unaffected by the general change from passiveto active
expression (as is seen, for example, in the c. 3rdcentury shift
from expressions of the type inimicus mihioccisus est and mihi illud
factum est to transitive expressions using habeo:inimicum occisum
habeo and habeo illud factum.101
101Jacques van Ginneken, "Avoir et fitre du point de vuede la
linguistique generale," MELANGES DELINGUISTIQUE, OFFERTS A CHARLES
BALLY, Geneva (1939) 83-92; 86.
It seems very unlikely to me that syntactic changesof the type
known from the present state of our knowledge arereally eapable of
showing an intellectual evolution of a type aspotentially significant
as whatever might beunderstood as the transition from an essentially
passive to an essentially active point of view.The connection
claimed by van Ginneken between ergativity and the'feminine' character
of the cultures that have ergative languagesis one which also deserves
to be brought into question.102
102The following seems worth quoting in full: "Nous sommes tous des
hommes, et tous nous avons deux talents: lesfacultes plus actives
de l'appetit et de la volontel et lesfacultes plus passives des
sensations et de l'apprehension; mais it estevident que les deux
sexes de l'humanite montrent sous cerapport une difference sensible.
"Wethnologie moderne, qui a ecarte definitivement comme insuffisante la doctrine du developpement uniforme, nousapprend cependant
que le progres del'humanite a balance presque toujours entre les
cultures plus feminines ou plus masculines, ditescultures matriarcales
et patriarcales.Ce sont toujours les cultures matriarcales tries
prononcees qui, comme le basque, ont un verbe transitif de nature
passive avec comme casus rectus un patiens et comme casusobliquus un
agens; mais les cultures patriarcales, commel'indo-europeenne ont un
verb transitif de nature active, animiste et magique, avec unsujet
au casus rectus et unobject au casus obliquus.Chaque peuple a
donc le verbe qu'il merite."(van Ginneken (1939) 91Z)


- 96 -
4.5Word order differences
The fifth criterion suggested for a language typologyis
that of word order.The variables that determine or constrain
the freedom of word order in the languages of theworld are very
likely to have many important connections with the casestructure
of sentences; but this is an area which I have notexamined at all.


- 97 -
5.The grammar of inalienable possession
The preceding sections have amounted to an informal description of a syntactic model for language and a few demonstrations
of the operations of the model of the sortthat has come to be
called 'restatement linguistics'.In the present section I
shall attempt to show how a particular substantivemodification
of the rules will permit a uniform way of describingthe interesting collection of grammatical facts associated withwhat is
called 'inalienable possession'.
Every language, one can be sure, has nouns which express
concepts that are inherently relational.Examples of inherently
relational nouns in English are side, daughter and face.One
doesn't speak of a side, but of a side of something; onedoesn't
say of someone that she is adaughter, only that she is somebody's
daughter; and although it is possible of speak ofhaving seen
a face, the word istypically used when referring to 'his face'
or 'your face' or the like.The relational nouns most frequently
discussed in the linguistic literature are names ofbody parts
and names of kinsmen.My discussion here will concentrate on body
parts.
5.1The data
5.1.1Significant syntactic relationships exist between the
dative and the genitive cases in all ofthe Indo-European languages; and in all butArmenian, according to Havers, the dative


-98-
and the genitive case forms figure in paraphrase relationships
of kinds that are highly comparable from language to language.103
103Wilhelm Havers, UNTERSUCHUNGEN ZUR KASUSSYNTAX DER INDOGERMAN-
ISCHEN SPRACHEN, Strassbourg (1911) Pp. 335; 317.
The relationship is observed only when the associatednoun is of
a particular type.To take some of the modern German examples
given by Havers, we observe that a paraphrase relation exists
between (111) and (112) as well as between (113) and (114); but
that of the two sentences (115) and (116), the latter is ungrammatical (as a paraphrase of (115)).
(111)die Kugel durchbohrte dem Feind das Herz
(112)die Kugel durchbohrte das Herz des Feindes
(113)er hat mir die Hand verwundet
(114)er hat meine Hand verwundet
(115)der Vater baute seinem Sohn ein Haus
(116)*der Vater baute ein Haus seines Sohnes
It whould be noted that Herz and Hand are the names of body parts,
while Haus is not.
5.1.2There are cases like the above where a given language exhibits
in itself the paraphrase relationship, and there are also cases
where it appears that one language has chosen the dative expression,
another the genitive.Notice the following sentences, also from
Havers.
(117)my heartaches; mir blutet das Herz


(118)Tom's cheeks burned; Tom brannten die Wangen
(119)she fell on her mother's neck; aie fiel ihrer
Mutter um den Hale104
Havers (1911) 1
5.1.3There are adnominal (possessive) uses of dative constructions, particular, it appears, when the possessivepronoun is
also used with the possessed element.Here the most readily
available examples are with kinship terms.
(120)dem Kerl seine Mutter
(121)sa mere a1ui105
105Examples are from Havers (1911) 283
5.1.4Many languages have separate possessive affixes fornouns
that are obligatorily possessed (j.nalienables) andnouns that are
optionally possessed (alienables).The difference in Fijian is
apparently expressed by pre-posing the possessive morpheme to
indicate alienable possession, suffixing it to indicate inalienable possession.Since the category 'inalienable' isa category
of grammar rather than a property of real world objects (since,
in other words, some objects grammatically classed as inalienable
can in fact be separated from their !owners'), the distinction
can be seen most clearly if both methods of expression can be
used with the same noun stem. 'IAvy-Bruhl gives a persuasive
example of this situation: Fijian uluqu means the head which is


-100 -
now firmly attached to my neck, while kequ ulu, also translatable
as 'my head', would refer to the head which, say, I am about to
eat.106
106L. Levy-Bruhl, "L'expression de la possession dans les langues
melanesiennes," BULLETIN DE LA SOCIETE LINGUISTIQUE DE PARIS,
XIX (1916) 96-104; 99.
Languages may have separate morphemes for indicating alienable
and inalienable possession, and they may have further distinctions
among these morphemes depending on the type of inalienable possession (as Nootka, for example, suffixes -?at- to nouns representing
physically inseparable entities, e.g. body parts, but uses other
means for kinship terms), or they may merely have a class of nouns
incapable of occurring as free forms--noun stems requiring affixation of possession indicators.107
107This last situation is sometimes described by saying that
nouns are 'inflected for person'.See Gabriel Manessy,
relation genitive dans quelques langues mande," PROCEEDINGS OF
THE NINTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF LINGUISTS, Mouton (1964)
467-475; 468.
The full variety of the treatment of inalienable possession
in different Amerindian languages is catalogued in Edward Sapir's
review of C. C. Uhlenbeck, "Het identificeerend karakter der
possessieve flexie in talen van Noord-Amerika," in INTERNATIONAL
JOURNAL OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS, I (1917) 86-90.
In all of these cases, it appears, the features in question
are 'grammatical' rather than purely 'notional'.Discussions of
inalienable possession almost always contains lists of nouns
whose grammatical classification is the opposite to what one
would notionally expect.Levy-Bruhl mentions a case where the


- 101 -
worf for 'left hand' functions as a body...Tart word grammatically,
but the word for 'hand' does not.108And Arapaho classifies
lO8L6vy-Bruhl (1916) 96.
'louse' (or 'flea') among the inalienables,109a situation that
109ZdenikSalzmann, "Arapaho VI: noun," INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
AMERICAN LINGUISTICS, XXXI (1965) 136-151; 139.
invites people who like to speculate on these things to propose
something or other on the Arapaho conception of 'self'.
5.1.5 Mika Ivi6 has recently discussed many instaaces of what
she calls 'non-omissible determiners'.Among the examples she
cites are many that involve nouns of the type frequently
included among the inalienables.The adjective cannot be deleted,
for example, in the Serbo-Croatian expression (122), for(123)
is ungrammatical.110
110Milka Ivi6,The grammatical category of non-omissible
determiners," LINGUA, XI (1962); and "Non-omissible determiners
in Slavic languages," PROCEEDINGS OF THE NINTHINTERNATIONAL
CONGRESS OF LINGUISTS, Mouton (1964) 476-479; the example is
from p. 477.
(122)devojka crnih oaiju"the girl with black eyes"
(123)*devojka aiju
What is misleading about her discussion, it seems to me, is the
decision to associate with the adjective the 'category of nonomissibility'.It is as if we wished to say, for the English
sentence (124), that there is amething grammaticallysignificant


about the word missing, since its deletion results in a
sentence (125) which is somewhat different in type from the
original; put differently, sentence (124/ does not say the
same thing that(126) does.What is genuinely important about
(124) is its paraphrasability as (127) Lor (128)) and the fact
that the construction exhibited by (124) is restricted to certain kinds of nouns.Note the ungrammaticality of (129):
(124)I have a missing tooth
(125)I have a tooth
(126)I have a tooth and it is missing
(127)my tooth is missing
(128)one of my teeth is missing
(129)*I have a missing five-dollar bill
5.1.6Note that in sentences (124) and (127), three things are
involved: (a) .a Possessor (an 'Interested Person', to use the
traditional term), (b) a Body Part, and (c) an Attribute --(a)
me, (b) tooth, and(c) missing respectively--and that the
sentences provide alternate ways of ascribing the Attribute to
the Possessor's Body Part.They are two distinct superficial
ways of expressing the same relationship amongthese three concepts.
Using P, B and A for (a),(b) and (c) above, we mny represent
the expression as seen in (124) as (130) and that as seen in(127)
as (131).
(130)pnomhave CA -0Bacc)
(131) Dgen -0 B] be A


-103-
The same element,in other words, which in some of the paraphrases mentioned above appeared in either the dative orthe
genitive case forms, is now also seen appearing as the subject
of the verb have.Bally, in fact, speaks of the invention of
the word have as having precisely the function of allowingthe
'personne interesseel, which otherwise would have to appear
either in dative or genitive form, to become the subject of a
sentence.Examples of all three surface appearances of a first
person Possessor are given by Bally as(132)-(134).(133) and
(134) correspond to expression types (130) and (131) respectively;
the expression type exemplified by (132) is given as(135).
(132)mihi Bunt capilli nigri
(133)j'ai les cheveux noirs
(134)mes cheveux sontnoirsill
pdat [BoomA]
111Charles Bally, "L'expression des idees de sphere personnelle
et de solidarite dans les langues indo-europeennes,"FESTSCHRIFT
LOUIS GAUCHAT, Aarau (1926) 68-78; 75.
5.1.74 Henri Frei surveyed this variety of surface representationsAthe 'same' sentences, and added a fourth type, a type intermediate, in a sentence, between that suggested by formula(135)
and that of (130).His example was sentence (136) (which also
provided the title of his paper), which , xemplifies the expression
type we may wish to represent as (137).
(136)Sylvie est jolie des yeux
(137)pnom[ABoblique].


- 104 -
Frei points out that the constructionseen in (136) is related
to the category of inalienable possession, since while (138)-
(139) are acceptable sentences, (140)-(141)are not.
(138)elle est fine de doigts
(139)elle est bien faite des jambes
(140)*elle est fine d'etoffe
(141)*elle est bien faite des vitements112
112Henri Frei, "Sylvie est jolie des yeux," MELANGES DE LINGUISTIQUE
OFFERTS A CHARLES BALLY, Geneva (1939) 185-192; 188.The expressions are limited to clear relationalnouns, not only to body parts.
Frei notes such phrasesas "des couloirs spacieux et bas de plafond"
and "fibre de moeurs."He beautifully demonstrates the distinctness of the sentences involving inalienable possession from
overtly similar sentences of different grammatical structures with
the contrast between (i) and (ii) below.(p. 186)
(i)la salle est pleine de visages
(ii)la femme est pleine de visage
5.1.8'Since Frei sees this diversityas resulting from the
attempt to 'condense' two judgments intoone sentence--the two
judgements that P has B and that B is A (inour terms)--he
relates the constructions in question to the much-discussed
edoubleeubjecte constructions of Japanese.In one type of this
latter construction, two nouns appear beforea verb or adjective,
the first followed by the particle bra(indicating what I have
called 'secondary topicalization'), the second by the particle
a(the particle of 'primary topicalization').(Variations on
the order and in the choice of particles do not change the status
of the construction; the form described is the one most stylistically neutral.)The second of these nouns is of the inalienable


type, the first identifies the object with respect to which the
object identified by the second noun is 'inalienable'.The
hackneyed example of the double-subject construction is item
(142), a sentence which has (143) as a sort of forced paraphrase.
In (143), the particle no is the particle whose functions are
closest to those we would be inclined to label 'genitive'.
(142)zoo wa hana ga nagai"elephant wa nose La long"
(143)zoo no hana ga nagai.
5.1.9That expressions involving entities viewed as being
closely associated with an 'interested person' have unique
grammatical properties has also been observed in certain semantically unmotivated uses of 'reflexive pronouns' and the parallels
one finds between these and various uses of the 'middlevoice'.
The connection with dative forms is seen in the fact that in
some languages a kind of 'dative reflexive' is usedin these
special situations.Note items (144) and (145).
(144)se laver les mains
(145)ich wasche mir die Hande
The connection between this use of the 'reflexive' and the
category of inalienable possession is indicated by BalXy where
he points out that in item (146), jambe is the inalienable
entity, while in (147) the word jambe can only (or, depending on
my informants, can also) be understood as someindependently
possessed object, such as the leg of a table.
(146)je me suis cease la jambe
(147)jai casa6 ma jambe
Notice that the jambe which does not have the possessive adjective


- 106 -
is the one which is grammatically characterized as 'obligatorily
possessed':113
113Bally (1936) 68f.
aMIMOMIIMP
5.2Adnominal datives
One way of introducing a possessive modifier of a noun has
already been suggested: a sentence which could on its own
assume the form 'X has Y' is embedded to NP.Since it is desirable for an embedded sentence to have a semantic interpretation
that contributes to the meaning of the whole sentence, the sentenceembedding source of possessives is needed as an explanation for
alienable possession.In other words, one is satisfied to have
the meaning of (148) represented as a part of the meaning of
(149), though we may reject such a zelationship between (150)
and (151).
(148)I have a dog
(149)my dog
(150)I have a head
(151)my head
A distinct method is required for introducing the possessive
element in the case of inalienable possession, a method which
reflects the fact that the relationship between the two nouns
in 'inalienable possession' is not (Else Frei) a sentential
relationship.


For the types of inalienable possession that we have
considered so far--in which the relationship haE zawaysbeen
to an animate or 'personal' entity--thb solution is to say
that some nouns obligatorily take D complements.This can be
managed by adding to the grammar another way ofwriting NB,
namely rule (152).
(152)NP --m N (D)
In the way that frame-features for Vs relate to environments
of Vs provided by the constituent P, frame-features forNs
relate to environments provided by the constituent NP.It was
suggested above that Ns which obligatorily take S complements
are assigned the feature4S ].We may now add that Ns
which obligatorily take D complements are characterized as
having the feature 4D ]; and these are the inalienably
possessed nouns.The notation imposes a subclassification of
nouns into those which requireadnominal D (such as son, child
in the meaning 'offspring', German Mann in the meaning'husband')
and those which reject adnominal D(such as person, child in
the meaning 'very young person', Miatin in the meaning'man').
The two sources of possessive modifiers which the grammar
now makes possible(adnominal D and adnominal S of a certain
type) provide the deep-structure differences needed for determining the difference in the form of the possessivemodifiers in
those languages which make the distinction overt in that way..
Where further distinctions are made (as between body parts and
kinship terms), the information on which suchdistinctions need
to be based may be included as lexical featuresof the Ns themselves.


- 108-
The general configuration of NPs containing Ds,then, is
that shown in (153).
(153)NP
K
Nr
N
In some cases the adnominal D remains in the NP and in fact
retains the surface features associated with D,as in item (154);
typically, however, a D insidea NP is changed to a genitive form,
as in (155).
(154)secretary to the president
(155)the president's secretary
If determiners are universal,114then the expansion of NP
1177--aIm inclined to think that they are.See my "The syntax of
English preverbs," to appear in GLOSSA, II (1967).
must make provisions for them; but if they are not, then those
languages which have them will need 'segmentalization' rules of the
type described by Postal115.At any rate, the determiners (which
115Paul M. Postal, "On so-called 'pronouns' in English," GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY MONOGRAPH NO. 19, LANGUAGES AND LINGUISTICS (1966),
177-206.
I represent as 'd') will figure in the various things thatcan
happen to adnominal D.Sometimes, for example, when a D remains
in the NPvithout undergoing genitive modification, certain of
its features are copied onto the determiner so that the determiner


- 109 -
may eventually assume theform of the appropriate 'possessive
adjective'.This seems to account for such expressions asthe
possessive dative with kinshipterms seen in some German dialects
(recall example (120)) in Ossetic,116etc.
116V, I. Abaev, A GRAMMATICALSKETCH OF OSSETIC, Indiana University Pr )ss (1964), 18.
5.3.Some illustrations
The D constituent often need not remain theNP: under some
conditions it may be 'promoted', so to speaksfrom the status
of a modifier of a N(which it is in the deep structure) to the
status of a major constituent on thenext higher level of the
syntactic structure.This can be seen in sentences having the
base configuration [ V + L + A]: just in case the N under L is
a body part, theD which in the deep structure is subjoinedto L
is 'promoted' to become a constituent ofP, yielding a sentence
superficially of the type+ D + L +A].
The verb pinch is accepted into the case frame[L + A],
and, except when it has taken onthe feature E+Passive], it is a
verb which deletes the prepositionof the following constituent.
Let us consider sentences derivable fromthe deep structure seen
in (156).


(156)
V
M
- 110-
KNP
dN
pastpinchon thenose
K'13
N
toJohnMary
We shall see what happens to the sentence under four conditions:
when the D remains inside L and A becomes the subject; when the D
remains inside L and L becomes the subject; when the D is promoted and A becomes the subject; and when the D is promoted and
D becomes the subject.
Whenever D remains inside NP (in this sentence), it is preposed to the N and converted to its genitive form, displacing the
original determiner.Since it is a personal noun, the K element
assumes the form of a genitive suffix.With non-promoted D, in
other words, (156) eventually becomes (157).
(157)
V
pastpinch
L
KNP
NPK
I
el
onJohnsnose
KNP
N
Mary


-111-
Diagrams (158) - (161) show the development from (157) when A
is made the subject: the subject-preposition is deleted andits case
category is erased; the preposition after pinch is deleted andthe
case category L is erased; andthe tense is absorbed into the V.
(158)
A
VKNP
1
byMary
(159)
(16o)
NP
N
past
Marypast
V
KNP
DN
/%6.NP
I I
pinchonJohn,snose
K
DN
NP
I I
pinchonJohn!snose
NP
11
NP
I I
MarypantpinchJohnnose


(161)
NP
I
N
May
- 112 -
V NP
D
NP
pinchedJohnIsnose
If the L of (157) is chosen as subject instead ofthe A, the
result is (162).This choice of subject requires the V to assume
the feature [ +Passive], which causes it to loseits ability to
delete following prepositions and its abilityto take tense affixes.
The surface structure eventually resulting from(162) is (163).
(162)
NP
i
onJohn'snose pastpinchby
+Pass
1
K
(163)
xP
DN
NP
N
Johnnose
S
T
M
was
V
NP
N
Mary
P
pinched
K
1P
byMary


- 113 -
Backing up to (156), we may now see the consequencesof
'promoting' adnominal D.When the D is removed from L and
becomes the left-most case constituent inP, the resulting
structure is (164).
(164)
1
past
L
NPKPKNP
11 I1
pinch toJohnonthenoseby Mary
The possible subjects for (164) are the A or thenewly promoted
D.When the subject is A, we get(165), a structure which, on
application of the rules we have learned,eventually becomes (166).
(165)
(166)
xr
N.
1
Mary
NP
I I
11IdN
pastpinch toJohnonthenose
pinched
NP
I
Johnonthenose


-ilk -
When D is made subject, on the other hand, we get(167); on
applying the rules appropriate to a V with thefeature [4-Passive],
we eventually get(168).
(167)
(168)
DM
NP
1
Johnpastpinch
NP
1
John
S
1
M
V
Ef-Pas]
INP
//N
di
on.thenosebyMary
waspinched
KNPKNP
d/\
1
N'
IonthenosebyMary
We may turn to the problem which interestedBally and Frei
and examine the role of adnominalD in sentences which assign
attributes to obligatorily possessedelements.The basic structure
of such sentences can be illustratedby item (169).


- 115
V
presbeautiful
N
KNP
I
eyestothegirl
In languages which allow the D to remain in the NP, the D element
is converted to its genitive form.In English this results in (170).
Since (170) has only the form [ V + 0 ], the 0 is necessarily
chosen as subject; the result for English is item (171).
(170)
Presbeliutiful
P
NP
D
NPK
dN
0 thegirl'seyes


(171)
NP
thegirl'eyesarebeautiful
- 116 -
1
V
Notice that since the V is an adjective, it is incapable of
'absorbing' the tense117
,requiring the provision of be within
117Stated more accurately, Vs which are adjectives, passives or
progressives are incapable of absorbing the rlghtmost affix inM.
the M constituent.(171) is a rendering of (170) in which the V
is predicated on the 0 and the D is subjoined to the0.Thus it
is analogous to our earlier sentences (127) and(134) and is of
the type indicated in (131).
Suppose next that the D of (170) does get 'promoted'.The
result of introducing the D in this way as an immediateconstituent
of the P is item (172).
(172)
M
NP
dNIIN
presbeautifultothegirl0eyes


- 117 -
Some languages allowthe 0 of configuration (172) tobecome the
subject, with the D elementremaining in the expected surfaceform
for D, as in sentence (132).Others allow the D element toundergo
secondary topicalizationwhen the 0 is subject, resulting,for
example, inone case of the 'double-subject' constructionin
Japanese (recall (142)).The general expression typefor sentences resulting from (172) when 0 becomessubject is suggested by
formula (135) above.
Many languages allow the Dto become subject.When this
happens and thereare no other changes, the 0appears in some
oblique case-form.This is so because,since beautiful is nota
true verb, the body-partword cannot be converted intoan 'object'.
The initial structureis seen in (173); it isone which is not
typical of English, thoughit is perhapsseen in such expressions
as those given in (174) and itmay represent a stage in the derivation of phrase of thetype given in (175).
(173)
v
thegirlpresbeautiful0
(174)tall of stature; blue in theface; etc.
(175)broad-chested; fat-legged; etc.
eyes


=1111.01k
-118 -
It appears to be the structural form underlying (136), whose
expression type is given in fermIlla (137).The construction is
apparently quite rare in French; Frei speaks of it as a 'shortcircuited' version of the sentences with have.
Another possibility, when D is subject, is to attach the
adjective to the NP indicating the body-part.I propose, in an
unhappily quite ad hoc fashion, that this be done without removing
the constituent label V.I believe there are some arguments for
retaining at least an abstract V under P at all times, so this
constraint may turx out to be better motivated than it seems.
The reason for this decision is that this appears to reflect what
actually happened in those languages which adopted a verb like
have.
The structure I have in mind is that shown in (176).
thegirl
NP
V
1-----"-----'""'"---...
N
1
pres00beautifuleyes
With the V under P vacant, the M must have a be added to it in
those languages which allow structures of this type to become
sentences directly.Notice that in this construction the modified
body-part NP as a whole is 'in' some case form.The formula for
this expression type has not yet been given; it would be something


- 119-
like (177).
(177)P be EA-0B]oblique
Conceivably this is the structure underlying such predicates as
those shown in (178); the difference between predicates of the
type (137) and those of the type (177) is seen in the Latin
paraphrases (179) and (180) respectively.
(178)of tall stature; di bello aspetto
(179)aequus animo
(180)aequo animo
The last possibility, then, is to insert into the vacated
V position the function word have, a verb which takes the modified body-part noun as its 'object'.In English, we have seen,
this involves deleting the preposition.The result of modifying
(176) in thisway is (181).
(181)
the
P
V NP
V N
girlpreshavebeautifuleyes
In short, it appears that the considerable surface variety
found in sentences involving attribution of some property to an
inalienable noun is to be accounted for by positing for universal
grammar, in the spirit of Bach (1965), a set of recurrent transformations which each language uses somewhat in its own way.For


- 120 -
sentences of the general structuraltype (182)
(182)PEv°ED + N
where V is an adjective and N is abody-part noun, the options
are (a) -(d) below:
(a)PROMOTE D
(b)CHOOSE D AS SUBJECT
(c)COPY ADJECTIVE INTO BODY-PART NP
(d)INSERT HAVE INTO THE VACATED V
When (a) is not applied, the D becomes a genitivemodifier of the
body;part N and the whole 0 becomes thesubject.When (b) is not
applied, the 0 becomes the subject.When (c) is not applied': the
'short-circuited' sentences of Frei are the result.Rule (d) is
available only to those languages which have'invented' have.
5.4Further remarks on inalienable possession
If the feature of inalienable possession is tobe treated as
a universal propertyof language, then either vocabularyitems
which are translations of each otherwill be categorized alike
with respect to alienability, or the waysin which languages
separately classify the 'same' things maypossibly reflect differences in the psychicmake-up of the speakers of differentLang=
uages.Many scholars have seen in the data oninalienabilia an
opportunity for the science of languageto shed light on primitive
mentality and on the possible range ofman's concept of 'self'.
Since the differences appear more and moreto be differences on
the level of surface strncturb, it maybe advisable to wait some


- 121-
time before reaching auy conclusions on these matters.118
For representative statements on the sociological relevance
of the study of inalienable possession, see Levy-Bruhl (1916)
103; Bally (1926) 68 et passim; Frei (1939) 192; and van
Ginneken (1939) 90.For a catalogue of noun classifications
based on grammatical differences associated with inalienable
possession, see Haiim Rosen, "Die Ausdrucksform fur 'veriusserlichen' and 'unverausserlichen' Besitz im Frilhgriechinchen,"
LINGUA, VIII (1959) 264-293; 268f.
Adnominal D will certainly be needed for more than bodypart nouns and names of relatives.Directional indicators like
right and left are probably nouns of this type too.The reason
that these words appear typically without any personal reference
in English and maly other languages is that they frequently refer
to position or direction with respect to the speaker or addressee
of the utterance, and there are simply many situations in which
an adnominal D does not need to be expressed if it identifies
speaker or hearer.
There are, too, many relational nouns which do not have a
specifically personal reference.We might wish to say that
certain 'locational' nouns take an adnominal L.These nouns
sometimes name parts of the associated objects, as in (183),
and they sometimes identify a location or direction stated with
reference to the associated object but not considered as a part
of it, as seen in (184).'Nouns' of the second type appear
superficially as prepositions in English.
(183)corner of the table, edge of the cliff, top
of the box
(184)behind the house, ahead of the car, next to
the tower


- 122-
6.Problems and suggestions
There is a considerableresidue of unsolved problemsin the
grammatical description oflanguage phenomena, and it isdisappointing though not surprisingto realize how many ofthem
remain unsolved under theformulation of grammar l havebeen
suggesting.Those which come most quickly tomind are coordinate
conjunction, nominal predicates,and 'cognate objects'.
6.1Coordinate conjunction
There may be a relationship betweenthe ways in which
languages deal with 'comitative'constructions and the phenomenon
of coordinate conjunctionof NPs.Put in case terms, there may
be a relationship betweenconjunction of NPs and what onemight
wish to refer to as aComitative case.Jespersen noticed the
parallels between with(a preposition which has aComitative
function) and the conjunctor and, asin such pairs ofsentences
as(185) and (186).
(185)he and his wife arecoming
(186)he is coming with hiswifell9
119Jespersen (1924) 90
Japanese has separate devicesfor indicating sentenceconjunction
and NP-conjunction,and the posipositionused for NP-conjuncttion


is identical with the Comitative postposition.In a conjunction
of NPs, all but the last have the postposition to.The last one
has the postposition appropriate for the case role of the whole
NP.Compare (187) and (188).
(187)Tanaka-san to Hashimoto-san ga kimashita
"Mr. Tanaka and Mr. Hashimoto came"
(188)Hashimoto-san ga Tanaka-san to hanashimashita
"Mr. Hashimoto spoke with Mr. Tanaka"
Redden points out that in Walapai a sentence has only one noun
in the 'nominative' case.Noun conjunctions are effected by
having the 'ablative' suffix--the suffix with Comitative function- -
on all but one of the nouns in aconjunction.Thus, in (189),
/4/ is nominative, /-m/ ablative.
(189)/hatAitAaahalm/
"the dog and the boy" (lit. "the dog with the
boy")
It may be that rule (190) is needed as an expansion rule for
NP.
(190)NPNP+C
Using X as a cover term for the various case categories,(190)
will produce such structures as (191).
(191)X
KNP
NP


- 124 -
The case category C has a very special status, since the
selectional constraints on nouns under C are those of the
superordinate C.What is needed, in other words, is a rule
which imposes on any N under C the same redundant features
that are associated with the dominating non-C case.
A subjoined C under some circumstances must remain in the
large NP.In languages which lack a generalized conjunctor, the
case marker is simply that appropriateto C (the postposition
to in Japanese, the suffix -m in Walapai); in languages which
have a generalized conjunctor, it replaces the case marker, in
the way that and replaces with under certain conditions.
The structure underlying (185) and (186), then, might be
something like (192); we ignore the source of his.
(192)
pres
V
[Pro];
come
NP
NKNP
dN
I
byhewiththewife
If the C remains inside the NP, the entire A becomes thesubject,
yielding sentence (185); if the C is promoted, however, asin


- 125 -
the structure shown in (193), it is leftbehind when the A
becomes the subject, resulting in sentence(186).
(193)S
M
V-------A
[N]-./'''*%./*°"4""
KNPKNP
h11
N
Arescomewith hiswifebyhe
It is quite unlikely that the numerous problemsassociated
with NP conjunction can be appreciablysimplified through this
approach, but that there is some connectionbetween conjunction
and comitative uses of NPs cannot bedoubted.Lakoff and Peters
have recently presented very persuasivearguments that the
'direction' of the relationship is the oppositeof eat I have
suggested; that, in other words, Comitativephrases are derived
from NP conjunction rather than theother way around.120
120George Lakoff and Stanley Peters,"Phrasal Conjunction and
Symmetric Predicates,"HARVARD COMPUTATION LABORATORYREPORT
NO. NSF #17 (1966) VI-1 - VI-49.
6.2Nominal Predicates
Nothing that has been said so far suggests a wayof providing
for sentences of the N be N type.It is clear that they representwwwmff+re


-126 -
a distinctsentence type from thoseinvolving any of the case
relations discussed above,though there may be morethan one
case relationshipinvolved in these sentences.(The terms
Essive and Translative come tomind.)
There are some nouns that appearin predicate positionbut
which are restricted in their occurrenceelsewhere.It might
be possible to treatthese nouns as, on onelevel, Vs which are
restricted to the formA].Examples are words likeidiot,
bastard and fool.The environment contains Abecause the subject
is always animate andbecause the constructionsexhibit selectional and transformationalproperties associated withVs having
As in their environment.Notice items (194) and(195).
(194)don't be a fool
(195)he's being a bastard again
This interpretation appears to accountfor the fact that wehave
sentences like(196), but not--with idiot usedin this same
'evaluative' sense--(197).
(196)John is an idiot
(197)an idiothit the first homerun
Further evidence that theword is properly treated as aV is
found in the fact thatthese nouns may accepttypes of modification usually associatedwith adjectives, as in(198).
(198)John is quite an idiot
The serious problems are(a) with the use of words like
idiot, fool, etc., inother contexts, as in(199), and (b) with


-127-
the use of non-evaluative Ns in predicate sentence, as in (200).
(199)that rat swiped my lunch
(200)that boy is my nephew
A new case category or two could be invented for the occasion,
of course, but such matters as the number agreement requirement
between subject and predicate NPs remain as serious as they ever
were.Perhaps some solution is forthcoming along the lines of
Prof. Bach's proposals elsewhere in this volume.
6.3Cognate objects
A difficulty of another sort is presented by the so-called
'cognate- object' constructions.These are constructions in
which, at the very least, there is a high selectivity between
a specific V and an 'object' 14 and in which theV+N combination
in one language might well be matched by a V alone in another
language.
Slightly modifying a recent analysis by SandraBabcock121,
121Sandra S. Babcock, "Syntactic dissimilation" (1966) unpublished
paper; compare too the interpretation in terms of'quasi- transformations.' found in Zellig Harris, "Co-occurrence and transformation inlinguistic structure,"LANGUAGE, XXXIII (1957) 283-
240, Sec. 30.
I would propose that there are contexts in which the case category
F (Factitive) may be left lexically empty, and that certain words
classified as Vs may be inserted specifically into frames containing dummy Fs.These words may have associated with them


-128 -
special N representatives (like, e.g.,bath) and special pro-Vs
(like, e.g., take).The rules that apply to dummy-F sentences
are the following:
(a)COPY THE N-REPRESENTATIVE OF THE V UNDERTHE F
(b)REPLACE THE V BY THE DESIGNATED PRO-V
The rules may have separate conditions of optionality for
different Vs.The cognate-object V dream may appear as a V in
its own right, or it may appear in dummy-Fsentences.As a
cognate-object verb, it has dream as itsN-representative, have
as its pro-V; it is further specified asselecting either the
preposition about or of for the 0 constituent and asnot requiring rule (b).
When the N-representative associated with dream is copied
into the F constituent, the result is sentence(201); when the
associated verb have replaces the V, the resultis (202).
(201)John dreamed a dream about Mary
(202)John had a dream about Mary
With these devices, we may in fact consider extendingthe
interpretation of cognate-object constructions inthe following
way.Some words may be treated as cognate-objectVs even though
4.
the rule for replacing the pro-V isobligatory.The V nightmare,
e.g., might have nightmarelisted as its N-representative and
have as its pro-V.Thus, on applying rule (a), structure(203)
becomes the intermediate structure(204); on applying rule (b),
(204) is converted to (205).Analogous uses of this device


-129-
could possibly account for the connectionbetween suggest,
and make a suggestion, shove someone andgive someone a shove,
and so on, but many serious problemsremain.In particular it
is not obvious how sentences like(206) and (207) can be dealt
with in accordance with these proposals.
(203)
(204)
P
V F
1
nightmare0
V
nightmarenightmare
(205)
1
havenightmare
(206)she made several ridiculoussuggestions
(207)I had a terrible nightmare lastnight
6.4Other problems
There are many issues for which I cannot evenpretend to
see solutions.The apparent connection betweensurface cases
and 'partitive' functions;the restriction of 'definiteness'in
some languagesto NPs in particular surface caserelations


-130-
(typically, the 'direct object'); the extreme variety of surface
realizations of the same meaning (from the same deep structure?)
that Jespersen illustrates in connection with what he calls
'rank shifting'122
,to name just a few.
122Jespersen (1924) 91
The difficulties mentioned so far are empirical in nature,
but many formal problems exist as well.One of these is whether
the permitted arrays of cases under P need to be generated via
phrase-structure rules, since one of the most important functions
of the PS-rules has been that of defining grammatical relations- -
that is, that of defining phenomena which are here partly treated
categorially rather than configurationally.Related to this
problem is the apparent dependency relations that exist amolE
cases.It appears, for example, that the occurrence of B (Benefactive) phrases in a sentence has more to do with whether the
sentence contains an A than with independent specific properties
of Vs.One is almost willing to allow these facts to be
expressed by a generative process which chooses a verb, then
chooses the cases required by that verb, then chooses the other
cases compatible with the cases originallychosen.The issue is
not whether the permitted sequences can or cannot be generated
by PS-rules--there is no doubt that they can--but whether the
kinds of co-occurrence or dependency relationships that seem to
obtain might not be more efficiently stated in some other way.


- 131-
(Modifications of transformational grammar of the type
introduced in Chomsky's ASPECTS (see fn.1) made it no longer
necessary to use PS-rules forsubclassification of lexical
categories or for the choice of lexicalitems.If the provision of syntactic relations of certainkinds must also be
handled by some device other thanPS-rules, there is a chance
that rules of this type may be abandonedaltogether.)
Whether the cases should be represented as categories
dominating NPs or in some other way is anissue which seems to
me to be fairly wide open.One advantage of the categorial
treatment is that NPs made subject and object maybe said to have
lost their 'original' case relation tothe sentence (by the rule
which 'erases' the case category wheneverthe case marker K has
been deleted, i.e., a 'node-razing'rule) with the result that
their form can only be determined by referringto their 'pure
relational' status.Thus it would appear that the surface distinction between labeled and configurationallydefined relations
on NPs may correspondwith the traditional distinctionbetween
the 'concrete' and the !grammatical' cases.(How the genitive
figures in this distinction is not clearunder either interpretation.)
Several people have pointed out to me theapparent convertibility of case grammar underlyingrepresentations into objects
which resemble dependency diagrams andtagmemic formulas.If
the K elements are interpreted asconstituents of NPG, then the
case categoriesunarily dominate NPs.This makes them equivalent


-132 -
to labels on the branches that likeP with the various NP
that are directly related to it.If the only function of the
P is to provide a constituent in terms of whichthe NPs can
be related to the V, one may just aswell represent these
relationships more directly by replacingthe node P by the V.
The result is no longer a constituent-structure diagram,since
lexical elements are inserted into'dominating' nodes; but it
may turn out to be just aspossible to represent the needed
constituent organization of sentences from a'stemmatic' diagram
of the type used by Tesniere orHays, as from a phrase-structure
tree liagram.
There is an easy conversion from case grammar underlying
representations to 'tagmemic' formulas, too, aslong as the case
categories unarily dominate NPs.Or, for that matter, a casegrammar diagram could simplybe read off as a tagmemic formula,
as long as certainsymbols were designated as functionindicators.One can as easily say "NP filling an Aslot" as anything
else.The crucial difference between the modificationof
transformational grammar that I have beensuggesting and the
typical tagmemic study is in theinsistence here on discovering
the 'deepest' level of the 'deepstructure'.


- 133 -
7.Closing words
One criticism of case grammar that has beenbrought to
my attention is that it is toostrongly motivated by semantic
considerations.Many of the analyses have(hopefully) the
result that certain semantic distinctionsand inter-language
commonalities are revealed in fairly direct waysin case
grammar deep structures, but,it has been argued, syntactic
analyses should be based on syntactic dataalone, and one
language at a time.
The question arises whether there is a 'level' ofsyntactic description that is discoverable one languageat a time
based on purely syntactic criteria.If it is possible to
discover a semantically justified universalsyntactic theory
along the lines I have been suggesting; ifit is possible by
rules (beginning, perhaps, with those whichassign sequential
order to the underlying order-freerepresentations) to make
these 'semantic deep structures' into the surfaceforme of
sentences; then it is likely that the syntacticdeep structure
of the type that has been made familiarfrom the work of
Chomsky and his students, is going to go the wayof the
phoneme.It is an artificial intermediate level betweenthe
empirically discoverable 'semantic deep structure'and the
observationally accessible surface structure, alevel the
properties of which have more to do withthe methodological


- 134-
commitments of grammarians than with the nature of human
languages.123
1231wronglyong y expected these remarks to have a certain shock
value at the symposium.There I was attacked for constructing
deep structure representations that were too hampered by
considerations of surface syntactic facts to get at the underlying semantic realities.This is a problem which, as they
say, requires further study.
