1  
  
On What There Is 
by Willard Van Orman Quine (1948) 
 
A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicit y. It can be put in three 
Anglo-Saxon monosyllables: ‘What is there? ’ It can be answered, moreover, in a 
word— ‘Everything’—and everyone will accept this answer as true. However, this is 
merely to say that there is what there is. There remains room for disagreement over 
cases; and so the issue has stayed alive down the centuries.  
Suppose now that two philosophers, McX and I, differ over ontology. Suppose McX 
maintains there is something which I maintain there is not. McX can, quite consistently 
with his own point of view, describe our difference of opinion by saying that I refuse 
to recognize certain entities. I should protest, of course, that he is wrong in his 
formulation of our disagreement, for I maintain that there are no entities, of the kind 
which he alleges, for me to recognize; but my finding him wrong in his formulation of 
our disagreement is unimportant, for I am committed to considering him wrong in his 
ontology anyway.  
When I try to formulate our difference of opinion, on the other hand, I seem to be in a 
predicament. I cannot admit that there are some things which McX countenances and I 
do not, for in admitting that there are such things I should be contradicting my own 
rejection of them.  
It would appear, if this reasoning were sound, that in any ontological dispute the 
proponent of the negative side suffers the disadvantage of not being able to admit that 
his opponent disagrees with him.  
This is the old Platonic riddle of nonbeing. Nonbeing must in some sense be, otherwise 
what is it that there is not? This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed Plato’s beard; 
historically it has proved tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam’s razor.  
It is some such line of thought that leads philosophers like McX to impute being where 
they might otherwise be quite content to recognize that there is nothing. Thus, take 
Pegasus. If Pegasus were not, McX argues, we should not be talking about anything 
when we use the word; therefore it would be nonsense to say even that Pegasus is not. 
Thinking to show thus that the denial of Pegasus cannot be coherently maintained, he 
concludes that Pegasus is.  
McX cannot, indeed, quite persuade himself that any region of space -time, near or 
remote, contains a flying horse of flesh and blood. Pressed for further details on 
Pegasus, then, he says that Pegasus is an idea in men ’s minds. Here, ho wever, a 
confusion begins to be apparent. We may for the sake of argument concede that there 
is an entity, and even a unique entity (though this is rather implausible), which is the 
mental Pegasus-idea; but this mental entity is not what people are talking  about when 
they deny Pegasus.  
McX never confuses the Parthenon with the Parthenon-idea. The Parthenon is physical; 
the Parthenon-idea is mental (according anyway to McX’s version of ideas, and I have 
no better to offer). The Parthenon is visible; the Parthenon-idea is invisible. We cannot 
easily imagine two things more unlike, and less liable to confusion, than the Parthenon 
and the Parthenon -idea. But when we shift from the Parthenon to Pegasus, the 
confusion sets in—for no other reason than that McX would sooner be deceived by the 
crudest and most flagrant counterfeit than grant the nonbeing of Pegasus.  

2  
  
The notion that Pegasus must be, because it would otherwise be nonsense to say even 
that Pegasus is not, has been seen to lead McX into an elementary co nfusion. Subtler 
minds, taking the same precept as their starting point, come out with theories of Pegasus 
which are less patently misguided than McX ’s, and correspondingly more difficult to 
eradicate. One of these subtler minds is named, let us say, Wyman . Pegasus, Wyman 
maintains, has his being as an unactualized possible. When we say of Pegasus that there 
is no such thing, we are saying, more precisely, that Pegasus does not have the special 
attribute of actuality. Saying that Pegasus is not actual is on a par, logically, with saying 
that the Parthenon is not red; in either case we are saying something about an entity 
whose being is unquestioned.  
Wyman, by the way, is one of those philosophers who have united in ruining the good 
old word ‘exist’. Despite his espousal of unactualized possibles, he limits the word 
‘existence’ to actuality—thus preserving an illusion of ontological agreement between 
himself and us who repudiate the rest of his bloated universe. We have all been prone 
to say, in our commonsense usage of ‘exist’, that Pegasus does not exist, meaning 
simply that there is no such entity at all. If Pegasus existed he would indeed be in space 
and time, but only because the word  
‘Pegasus’ has spatio -temporal connotations, and not because ‘exists’ has spatio -
temporal connotations. If spatio -temporal reference is lacking when we affirm t he 
existence of the cube root of 27, this is simply because a cube root is not a spatio -
temporal kind of thing, and not because we are being ambiguous in our use of ‘exist’.[1] 
However, Wyman, in an ill-conceived effort to appear agreeable, genially grants us the 
nonexistence of Pegasus and then, contrary to what we meant by nonexistence of 
Pegasus, insists that Pegasus is. Existence is one thing, he says, and subsistence is 
another. The only way I know of coping with this obfuscation of issues is to give 
Wyman the word ‘exist’. I ’ll try not to use it again; I still have ‘is’. So much for 
lexicography; let’s get back to Wyman’s ontology.  
Wyman’s overpopulated universe is in many ways unlovely. It offends the aesthetic 
sense of us who have a taste for desert landscapes, but this is not the worst of it. 
Wyman’s slum of possibles is a breeding ground f or disorderly elements. Take, for 
instance, the possible fat man in that doorway; and, again, the possible bald man in that 
doorway. Are they the same possible man, or two possible men? How do we decide? 
How many possible men are there in that doorway? Are  there more possible thin ones 
than fat ones? How many of them are alike? Or would their being alike make them 
one? Are no two possible things alike? Is this the same as saying that it is impossible 
for two things to be alike? Or, finally, is the concept of identity simply inapplicable to 
unactualized possibles? But what sense can be found in talking of entities which cannot 
meaningfully be said to be identical with themselves and distinct from one another? 
These elements are well -nigh incorrigible. By a Fr egean therapy of individual 
concepts,[2] some effort might be made at rehabilitation; but I feel we’d do better simply 
to clear Wyman’s slum and be done with it.  
Possibility, along with the other modalities of necessity and impossibility and 
contingency, raises problems upon which I do not mean to imply that we should turn 
our backs. But we can at  least limit modalities to whole statements. We may impose 
the adverb ‘possibly’ upon a statement as a whole, and we may well worry about the 
semantical analysis of such usage; but little real advance in such analysis is to be hoped 
for in expanding our un iverse to include so -called possible entities. I suspect that the 
main motive for this expansion is simply the old notion that Pegasus, for example, must 
be because otherwise it would be nonsense to say even that he is not.  

3  
  
Still, all the rank luxuriance of Wyman’s universe of possibles would seem to come to 
naught when we make a slight change in the example and speak not of Pegasus but of 
the round square cupola on Berkeley College. If, unless Pegasus were, it would be 
nonsense to say that he is not, then by the same token, unless the round square cupola 
on Berkeley College were, it would be nonsense to say that it is not. But, unlike 
Pegasus, the round square cupola on Berkeley College cannot be admitted even as an 
unactualized possible. Can we drive Wyman now to admitting also a realm of 
unactualizable impossibles? If so, a good many embarrassing questions could be asked 
about them. We might hope even to trap Wyman in contradictions, by getting him to 
admit that certain of these entities are at once round and square. But the wily Wyman 
chooses the other horn of the dilemma and concedes that it is nonsense to say that the 
round square cupola on Berkeley College is not. He says that the phrase ‘round square 
cupola’ is meaningless.  
Wyman was not the first to embrace this alternative. The doctrine of the 
meaninglessness of contradictions runs away back. The tradition survives, moreover, 
in writers who seem to share none of Wyman ’s motivations. Still, I wonder whether 
the first temptation to such a doctrine may not have been substantially the motivation 
which we have observed in Wyman. Certainly the doctrine has no intrinsic appeal; and 
it has led its devotees to such quixotic extremes as that of challenging the method of 
proof by reductio ad absurdum—a challenge in which I sense a reductio ad absurdum 
of the doctrine itself.  
Moreover, the doctrine of meaninglessness of contradictions has the severe 
methodological drawback that it makes it impossible, in principle, ever to devi se an 
effective test of what is meaningful and what is not. It would be forever impossible for 
us to devise systematic ways of deciding whether a string of signs made sense —even 
to us individually, let alone other people —or not. For it follows from a disco very in 
mathematical logic, due to Church , that there can be no generally applicable test of 
contradictoriness.  
I have spoken disparagingly of Plato’s beard, and hinted that it is tangled. I have dwelt 
at length on the inconveniences of putting up wit h it. It is time to think about taking 
steps.  
Russell, in his theory of so-called singular descriptions, showed clearly how we might 
meaningfully use seeming names without supposing that there be the entities allegedly 
named. The names to which Russell ’s theory directly applies are complex descriptive 
names such as ‘the author of Waverley’, ‘the present King of France’, ‘the round square 
cupola on Berkeley College ’. Russell analyzes such phrases systematically as 
fragments of the whole sentences in which t hey occur. The sentence “The author of 
Waverley was a poet ’, for example, is explained as a whole as meaning ‘Someone 
(better: something) wrote Waverley and was a poet, and nothing else wrote Waverley’. 
(The point of this added clause is to affirm the uniqueness which is implicit in the word 
‘the’, in ‘the author of Waverley’.) The sentence ‘The round square cupola on Berkeley 
College is pink ’ is explained as ‘Something is round and square and is a cupola on 
Berkeley College and is pink, and nothing else is  round and square and a cupola on 
Berkeley College’.[3]  
The virtue of this analysis is that the seeming name, a descriptive phrase, is paraphrased 
in context as a so -called incomplete symbol. No unified expression is offered as an 
analysis of the descriptive phrase, but the statement as a whole which was the context 
of that phrase still gets its full quota of meaning—whether true or false.  

4  
  
The unanalyzed statement ‘The author of Waverley was a poet ’ contains a part, ‘the 
author of Waverley’, which is wrongly supposed by McX and Wyman to demand 
objective reference in order to be meaningful at all . But in Russell ’s translation, 
‘Something wrote Waverley and was a poet and nothing else wrote Waverley’, the 
burden of objective reference which had been put upon the descriptive phrase is now 
taken over by words of the kind that logicians call bound var iables, variables of 
quantification, namely, words like ‘something’, ‘nothing’, ‘everything’. These words, 
far from purporting to be names specifically of the author of Waverley, do not purport 
to be names at all; they refer to entities generally, with a k ind of studied ambiguity 
peculiar to themselves.[4] These quantificational words or bound variables are, of course 
a basic part of language, and their meaningfulness, at least in context, is not to be 
challenged. But their meaningfulness in no way presupposes there being either the 
author of Waverley or the round square cupola on Berkeley College o r any other 
specifically preassigned objects.  
Where descriptions are concerned, there is no longer any difficulty in affirming or 
denying being. ‘There is the author of Waverley’ is explained by Russell as meaning 
‘Someone (or, more strictly, something) w rote Waverley and nothing else wrote 
Waverley’. ‘The author of Waverley is not ’ is explained, correspondingly, as the 
alternation ‘Either each thing failed to write Waverley or two or more things wrote 
Waverley’. This alternation is false, but meaningful; and it contains no expression 
purporting to name the author of Waverley. The statement ‘The round square cupola on 
Berkeley College is not’ is analyzed in similar fashion. So the old notion that statements 
of nonbeing defeat themselves goes by the board. W hen a statement of being or 
nonbeing is analyzed by Russell ’s theory of descriptions, it ceases to contain any 
expression which even purports to name the alleged entity whose being is in question, 
so that the meaningfulness of the statement no longer can be thought to presuppose that 
there be such an entity.  
Now what of ‘Pegasus’? This being a word rather than a descriptive phrase, Russell ’s 
argument does not immediately apply to it. However, it can easily be made to apply. 
We have only to rephrase ‘Pegasus’ as a description, in any way that seems adequately 
to single out our idea; say, ‘the winged horse that was captured by Bellerophon ’. 
Substituting such a phrase for ‘Pegasus’, we can then proceed to analyze the statement 
‘Pegasus is’, or ‘Pegasus is not’, precisely on the analogy of Russell’s analysis of ‘The 
author of Waverley is’ and ‘The author of Waverley is not’.  
In order thus to subsume a one -word name or alleged name such as ‘Pegasus’ under 
Russell’s theory of description, we must, of course, be a ble first to translate the word 
into a description. But this is no real restriction. If the notion of Pegasus had been so 
obscure or so basic a one that no pat translation into a descriptive phrase had offered 
itself along familiar lines, we could still ha ve availed ourselves of the following 
artificial and trivial -seeming device: we could have appealed to the ex hypothesi  
unanalyzable, irreducible attribute of being Pegasus, adopting, for its expression, the 
verb ‘is-Pegasus’, or ‘pegasizes’. The noun ‘Pegasus’ itself could then be treated as 
derivative, and identified after all with a description: ‘the thing that is -Pegasus’, ‘the 
thing that pegasizes’.[5]  
If the importing of such a predicate as ‘pegasizes’ seems to commit us to recognizing 
that there is a corresponding attribute, pegasizing, in Plato’s heaven or in the minds of 
men, well and good. Neither we nor Wyman nor McX have been contending, thus far, 
about the being or nonbeing of universals, but rather about that of Pegasus. If in terms 
of pegasizing we can interpret the noun ‘Pegasus’ as a description subject to Russell’s 

5  
  
theory of descriptions, then we have disposed of the old notion that Pegasus cannot be 
said not to be without presupposing that in some sense Pegasus is.  
Our argument is now quite general. McX and Wyman supposed that we could not 
meaningfully affirm a statement of the form ‘So-and-so is not ’, with a simple or 
descriptive singular noun in place of ‘so-and-so’, unless so-and-so is. This supposition 
is now seen to be quite generally groundless, since the singular noun in question can 
always be expanded int o a singular description, trivially or otherwise, and then 
analyzed out à la Russell.  
We commit ourselves to an ontology containing numbers when we say there are prime 
numbers larger than a million; we commit ourselves to an ontology containing centaurs 
when we say there are centaurs; and we commit ourselves to an ontology containing 
Pegasus when we say Pegasus is. But we do not commit ourselves to an ontology 
containing Pegasus or the author of Waverley or the round square cupola on Berkeley 
College when we say that Pegasus or the author of Waverley or the cupola in question 
is not. We need no longer labor under the delusion that the meaningfulness of a 
statement containing a singular term presupposes an entity named by the term. A 
singular term need not name to be significant.  
An inkling of this might have dawned on Wyman and McX even without benefit of 
Russell if they had only noticed —as so few of us do —that there is a gulf between 
meaning and naming even in the case of a singular term which is genuinely a name of 
an object. The following example from Frege will serve. The phrase ‘Evening Star’ 
names a certain large physical object of spherical form, which is hurtling through space 
some scores of millions of miles from here. The phrase ‘Morning Star’ names the same 
thing, as was probably first established by some observant Babylonian. But the two 
phrases cannot be regarded as having the same meaning; otherwise that Babylonian 
could have dispensed with his observations and contented himself with reflect ing on 
the meanings of his words. The meanings, then, being different from one another, must 
be other than the named object, which is one and the same in both cases.  
Confusion of meaning with naming not only made McX think he could not 
meaningfully repudiate Pegasus; a continuing confusion of meaning with naming no 
doubt helped engender his absurd notion that Pegasus is an idea, a mental entity. The 
structure of his confusion is as follows. He confused the alleged named object Pegasus 
with the meaning of the word ‘Pegasus’, therefore concluding that Pegasus must be in 
order that the word have meaning. But what sorts of things are meanings? This is a 
moot point; however, one might quite plausibly explain meanings as ideas in the mind, 
supposing we can make clear sense in turn of the idea of ideas in the mind. Therefore 
Pegasus, initially confused with a meaning, ends up as an idea in the mind. It is the 
more remarkable that Wyman, subject to the same initial motivation as McX, should 
have avoided this particular blunder and wound up with unactualized possibles instead.  
Now let us turn to the ontological problem of universals: the question whether there are 
such entities as attributes, relations, classes, numbers, functions. McX, 
characteristically enough, thinks there are. Speaking of attributes, he says: “There are 
red houses, red roses, red sunsets; this much is prephilosophical common sense in 
which we must all agree. These houses, roses, and sunsets, then, have something in 
common; and this which they have in common is all I mean by the attribute of redness.” 
For McX, thus, there being attributes is even more obvious and trivial than the obvious 
and trivial fact of there being red houses, roses, and sunsets. This, I think, is 
characteristic of metaphysics, or at least of that part of metaphysics called ontology: 

6  
  
one who regards a statement on this subject as true at all must regard it as trivially true. 
One’s ontology is basic to the conceptual scheme by which he interprets all 
experiences, even the most com monplace ones. Judged within some particular 
conceptual scheme—and how else is judgment possible? —an ontological statement 
goes without saying, standing in need of no separate justification at all. Ontological 
statements follow immediately from all manner of casual statements of commonplace 
fact, just as—from the point of view, anyway, of McX ’s conceptual scheme—‘There 
is an attribute’ follows from ‘There are red houses, red roses, red sunsets’. 
Judged in another conceptual scheme, an ontological statement which is axiomatic to 
McX’s mind may, with equal immediacy and triviality, be adjudged false. One may 
admit that there are red houses, roses, and sunsets, but deny, except as a popular and 
misleading manner of speaking, that they have anything in common. The words 
‘houses’, ‘roses’, and ‘sunsets’ are true of sundry individual entities which are houses 
and roses and sunsets, and the word ‘red’ or ‘red object ’ is true of each of sundry 
individual e ntities which are red houses, red roses, red sunsets; but there is not, in 
addition, any entity whatever, individual or otherwise, which is named by the word 
‘redness’, nor, for that matter, by the word ‘househood’, ‘rosehood’, ‘sunsethood’. That 
the houses and roses and sunsets are all of them red may be taken as ultimate and 
irreducible, and it may be held that McX is no better off, in point of real explanatory 
power, for all the occult entities which he posits under such names as ‘redness’.  
One means by  which McX might naturally have tried to impose his ontology of 
universals on us was already removed before we turned to the problem of universals. 
McX cannot argue that predicates such as ‘red’ or ‘is-red’, which we all concur in using, 
must be regarded a s names each of a single universal entity in order that they be 
meaningful at all. For we have seen that being a name of something is a much more 
special feature than being meaningful. He cannot even charge us —at least not by that 
argument—with having posi ted an attribute of pegasizing by our adoption of the 
predicate ‘pegasizes’.  
However, McX hits upon a different stratagem. “Let us grant,” he says, “this distinction 
between meaning and naming of which you make so much. Let us even grant that ‘is 
red’, ‘pegasizes’, etc., are not names of attributes. Still, you admit they have meanings. 
But these meanings, whether they are named or not, are still universals, and I venture 
to say that some of them might even be the very things that I call attributes, or 
something to much the same purpose in the end.”  
For McX, this is an unusually penetrating speech; and the only way I know to counter 
it is by refusing to admit meanings. However, I feel no reluctance toward refusing to 
admit meanings, for I do not thereby den y that words and statements are meaningful. 
McX and I may agree to the letter in our classification of linguistic forms into the 
meaningful and the meaningless, even though McX construes meaningfulness as the 
having (in some sense of ‘having’) of some abstract entity which he calls a meaning, 
whereas I do not. I remain free to maintain that the fact that a given linguistic utterance 
is meaningful (or significant, as I prefer to say so as not to invite hypostasis of meanings 
as entities) is an ultimate and irreducible matter of fact; or, I may undertake to analyze 
it in terms directly of what people do in the presence of the linguistic utterance in 
question and other utterances similar to it.  
The useful ways in which people ordinarily talk or s eem to talk about meanings boil 
down to two: the having of meanings, which is significance, and sameness of meaning, 
or synonymy. What is called giving the meaning of an utterance is simply the uttering 

7  
  
of a synonym, couched, ordinarily, in clearer languag e than the original. If we are 
allergic to meanings as such, we can speak directly of utterances as significant or 
insignificant, and as synonymous or heteronymous one with another. The problem of 
explaining these adjectives ‘significant’ and ‘synonymous’ with some degree of clarity 
and rigor —preferably, as I see it, in terms of behavior —is as difficult as it is 
important.[6] But the explanatory value of special and irreducible intermediary entities 
called meanings is surely illusory.  
Up to now I have argued that we can use singular terms significantly in sentences 
without presupposing that there a re the entities which those terms purport to name. I 
have argued further that we can use general terms, for example, predicates, without 
conceding them to be names of abstract entities. I have argued further that we can view 
utterances as significant, and as synonymous or heteronymous with one another, 
without countenancing a realm of entities called mea nings. At this point McX begins  
to wonder whether there is any limit at all to our ontological immunity. Does nothing 
we may say commit us to the assumption of universals or other entities which we may 
find unwelcome?  
I have already suggested a negative answer to this question, in speaking of bound 
variables, or variables of quantification, in connection with Russell ’s theory of 
descriptions. We can very ea sily involve ourselves in ontological commitments by 
saying, for example, that there is something  (bound variable) which red houses and 
sunsets have in common; or that there is something  which is a prime number larger 
than a million. But, this is, essentia lly, the only way we can involve ourselves in 
ontological commitments: by our use of bound variables. The use of alleged names is 
no criterion, for we can repudiate their namehood at the drop of a hat unless the 
assumption of a corresponding entity can be spotted in the things we affirm in terms of 
bound variables. Names are, in fact, altogether immaterial to the ontological issue, for 
I have shown, in connection with ‘Pegasus’ and ‘pegasize’, that names can be converted 
to descriptions, and Russell has shown that descriptions can be eliminated.  
Whatever we say with the help of names can be said in a language which shuns names 
altogether. To be assumed as an entity is, purely and simply, to be reckoned as the value 
of a variable. In terms of the categories of traditional grammar, this amounts roughly 
to saying that to be is to be in the range of reference of a pronoun. Pronouns are the 
basic media of reference; nouns might better have been named propronouns. The 
variables of quantification, ‘something’, ‘nothing’, ‘everything’, range over our whole 
ontology, whatever it may be; and we are convicted of a particular ontological 
presupposition if, and only if, the alleged presuppositum has to be reckoned among the 
entities over which our variables range in order to render one of our affirmations true.  
We may say, for example, that some dogs are white and not thereby commit ourselves 
to recognizing either doghood or whiteness as entities. ‘Some dogs are white’ says that 
some things that are dogs are white; and, in order that this statement be true, the things 
over which the bound variable ‘something’ ranges must include some white dogs, but 
need not include doghood or whiteness. On the other hand , when we say that some 
zoological species are cross -fertile we are committing ourselves to recognizing as 
entities the several species themselves, abstract though they are. We remain so 
committed at least until we devise some way of so paraphrasing the st atement as to 
show that the seeming reference to species on the part of our bound variable was an 
avoidable manner of speaking.[7]  

8  
  
Classical mathematics, as the example of primes larger than a million clearly illustrates, 
is up to its neck in commitments to an ontology of abstract entities. Thus it is that the 
great mediaeval controversy over univ ersals has flared up anew in the modern 
philosophy of mathematics. The issue is clearer now than of old, because we now have 
a more explicit standard whereby to decide what ontology a given theory or form of 
discourse is committed to: a theory is committed  to those and only those entities to 
which the bound variables of the theory must be capable of referring in order that the 
affirmations made in the theory be true.  
Because this standard of ontological presupposition did not emerge clearly in the 
philosophical tradition, the modern philosophical mathematicians have not on the 
whole recognized that they were debating the same old problem of universals in a 
newly clarified form. But the fundamental cleavages among modern points of view on 
foundations of mathematics do come down pretty explicitly to disagreements as to the 
range of entities to which the bound variables should be permitted to refer.  
The three main mediaeval points of view regarding universals are designated by 
historians as realism, conceptualism, and nominalism. Essentially these same three 
doctrines reappear in twentieth -century surveys of the philosophy of mathematics 
under the new names logicism, intuitionism, and formalism.  
Realism, as the word is used in connection with the mediaeval con troversy over 
universals, is the Platonic doctrine that universals or abstract entities have being 
independently of the mind; the mind may discover them but cannot create them. 
Logicism, represented by Frege, Russell, Whitehead, Church, and Carnap, condone s 
the use of bound variables to refer to abstract entities known and unknown, specifiable 
and unspecifiable, indiscriminately.  
Conceptualism holds that there are universals but they are mind -made. Intuitionism, 
espoused in modern times in one form or anot her by Poincaré, Brouwer, Weyl, and 
others, countenances the use of bound variables to refer to abstract entities only when 
those entities are capable of being cooked up individually from ingredients specified in 
advance. As Fraenkel has put it, logicism h olds that classes are discovered while 
intuitionism holds that they are invented—a fair statement indeed of the old opposition 
between realism and conceptualism. This opposition is no mere quibble; it makes an 
essential difference in the amount of classica l mathematics to which one is willing to 
subscribe. Logicists, or realists, are able on their assumptions to get Cantor’s ascending 
orders of infinity; intuitionists are compelled to stop with the lowest order of infinity, 
and, as an indirect consequence, to abandon even some of the classical laws of real 
numbers.[8] The modern controversy between logicism and intuitionism arose, in fact, 
from disagreements over infinity.  
Formalism, associated with the name of Hilbert, echoes intuitionism in deploring the 
logicist’s unbridled recourse to universals. But formalism also finds intuitionism 
unsatisfactory. This could happen for either of two opposite reasons. The formalist 
might, like the logicist, object to the crippling of classical mathematics; or he might, 
like the nominalists of old, object to admitting abstract entities at all, even in the 
restrained sense of mind -made entities. The upshot is the same: the formalist keeps 
classical mathematics as a play of insignificant notations. This play of notations can 
still be of utility —whatever utility it has already shown itself to have as a crutch for 
physicists and technologists. But utility need not imply significance, in any literal 
linguistic sense. Nor need the marked success of mathematicians in spinning out 
theorems, and in finding objective bases for agreement with one another ’s results, 

9  
  
imply significance. For an adequate basis for agreement among mathematicians can be 
found simply in the rules which govern the manipulation of the notations —these 
syntactical rules being, unlike the notations themselves, quite significant and 
intelligible.[9]  
I have argued that the sort of ontology we adopt can be consequential —notably in 
connection with ma thematics, although this is only an example. Now how are we to 
adjudicate among rival ontologies? Certainly the answer is not provided by the 
semantical formula “To be is to be the value of a variable”; this formula serves rather, 
conversely, in testing the conformity of a given remark or doctrine to a prior ontological 
standard. We look to bound variables in connection with ontology not in order to know 
what there is, but in order to know what a given remark or doctrine, ours or someone 
else’s, says there is; and this much is quite properly a problem involving language. But 
what there is is another question.  
In debating over what there is, there are still reasons for operating on a semantical 
plane. One reason is to escape from the predicament noted at the  beginning of this 
essay: the predicament of my not being able to admit that there are things which McX 
countenances and I do not. So long as I adhere to my ontology, as opposed to McX ’s, 
I cannot allow my bound variables to refer to entities which belong to McX’s ontology 
and not to mine. I can, however, consistently describe our disagreement by 
characterizing the statements which McX affirms. Provided merely that my ontology 
countenances linguistic forms, or at least concrete inscriptions and utterances, I can talk 
about McX’s sentences.  
Another reason for withdrawing to a semantical plane is to find common ground on 
which to argue. Disagreement  in ontology involves basic disagreement in conceptual 
schemes; yet McX and I, despite these basic disagreement s, find that our conceptual 
schemes converge sufficiently in their intermediate and upper ramifications to enable 
us to communicate successfully on such topics as politics, weather, and, in particular, 
language. In so far as our basic controversy over onto logy can be translated upward 
into a semantical controversy about words and what to do with them, the collapse of 
the controversy into question-begging may be delayed.  
It is no wonder, then, that ontological controversy should tend into controversy over 
language. But we must not jump to the conclusion that what there is depends on words. 
Translatability of a question into semantical terms is no indication that the question is 
linguistic. To see Naples is to bear a name which, when prefixed to the words ‘sees 
Naples’, yields a true sentence; still there is nothing linguistic about seeing Naples.  
Our acceptance of an ontology is, I think, similar in principle to our acceptance of a 
scientific theory, say a system of physics: we adopt, at least insofar as we are 
reasonable, the simplest conceptual scheme into which the disordered fragments of raw 
experience can be fitted and arranged. Our ontology is determined once we have fixed 
upon the over-all conceptual scheme which is to accommodate science in the broadest 
sense; and the considerations which determine a reasonable construction of any part of 
that conceptual scheme, for example, the biological or the physical part, are not 
different in kind from the considerations which determine a reasonable construction of 
the whole. To whatever extent the adoption of any system of scientific theory may be 
said to be a matter of language, the same—but no more— may be said of the adoption 
of an ontology.  

10  
  
But simplicity, as a guiding principle in constructing conceptual schemes, is not a clear 
and unambiguous idea; and it is quite capable of presenting a double or multiple 
standard. Imagine, for example, that we have devised the most economical set of 
concepts adequate to the play-by-play reporting of immediate experience. The entities 
under this scheme —the values of bound variables —are, let us suppose, individual 
subjective events of sensation or reflection. We should still find, no doubt, that a 
physicalistic conceptual scheme, purporting to talk about external objects, offers great 
advantages in simplifying our over -all reports. By bringing together scattered sense 
events and treating them as perceptions of one object, we reduce the complexity of our 
stream of experience to a manageable conceptual simplicity. The rule of s implicity is 
indeed our guiding maxim in assigning sense data to objects: we associate an earlier 
and a later round sensum with the same so-called penny, or with two different so-called 
pennies, in obedience to the demands of maximum simplicity in our total world-picture.  
Here we have two competing conceptual schemes, a phenomenalistic one and a 
physicalistic one. Which should prevail? Each has its advantages; each has its special 
simplicity in its own way. Each, I suggest, deserves to be developed. Each may be said, 
indeed, to be the more fundamental, though in different senses: the one is 
epistemologically, the other physically, fundamental.  
The physical conceptual scheme simplifies our account of experience because of the 
way myriad scattered sense events come to be associated with single so-called objects; 
still there is no likelihood that each sentence about physical objects can actually be 
translated, however deviously and complexly, into the phenomenalistic language. 
Physical objects are postulated e ntities which round out, and simplify our account of 
the flux of experience, just, as the introduction of irrational numbers simplifies laws of 
arithmetic. From the point of view of the conceptual scheme of the elementary 
arithmetic of rational numbers alo ne, the broader arithmetic of rational and irrational 
numbers would have the status of a convenient myth, simpler than the literal truth 
(namely, the arithmetic of rationals) and yet, containing that literal truth as a scattered 
part. Similarly, from a phe nomenalistic point, of view, the conceptual scheme of 
physical objects is a convenient myth, simpler than the literal truth and yet containing 
that literal truth as a scattered part.[10]  
Now what of classes or attributes of physical objects, in turn? A platonistic ontology 
of this sort is, from the point of view of a strictly physicalistic conce ptual scheme, as 
much a myth as that physicalistic conceptual scheme itself is for phenomenalism. This 
higher myth is a good and useful one, in turn, in so far as it simplifies our account of 
physics. Since mathematics is an integral part of this higher my th, the utility of this 
myth for physical science is evident enough. In speaking of it nevertheless as a myth, I 
echo that philosophy of mathematics to which I alluded earlier under the name of 
formalism. But an attitude of formalism may with equal justice be adopted toward the 
physical conceptual scheme, in turn, by the pure aesthete or phenomenalist.  
The analogy between the myth of mathematics and the myth of physics is, in some 
additional and perhaps fortuitous ways, strikingly close. Consider, for exam ple, the 
crisis which was precipitated in the foundations of mathematics, at the turn of the 
century, by the discovery of Russell ’s paradox and other antinomies of set theory. 
These contradictions had to be obviated by unintuitive, ad hoc  devices;[11] our 
mathematical myth-making became deliberate and evident to all. But what of physics? 
An antinomy arose between the undular and the corpuscular accounts of light; and if 
this was not as out -and-out a contradiction as Russell ’s paradox, I suspect that the 
reason is that physics is not as out -and-out as mathematics. Again, the second great 

11  
  
modern cri sis in the foundations of mathematics —precipitated in 1931 by Gödel ’s 
proof that there are bound to be undecidable statements in arithmetic —has its 
companion piece in physics in Heisenberg’s indeterminacy principle. 
In earlier pages I undertook to show  that some common arguments in favor of certain 
ontologies are fallacious. Further, I advanced an explicit standard whereby to decide 
what the ontological commitments of a theory are. But the question what ontology 
actually to adopt still stands open, and the obvious counsel is tolerance and an 
experimental spirit. Let us by all means see how much of the physicalistic conceptual 
scheme can be reduced to a phenomenalistic one; still, physics also naturally demands 
pursuing, irreducible in toto though it be. Let us see how, or to what degree, natural 
science may be rendered independent of platonistic mathematics; but let us also pursue 
mathematics and delve into its platonistic foundations.  
From among the various conceptual schemes best suited to these variou s pursuits, 
one—the phenomenalistic—claims epistemological priority. Viewed from within the 
phenomenalistic conceptual scheme, the ontologies of physical objects and 
mathematical objects are myths. The quality of myth, however, is relative; relative, in 
this case, to the epistemological point of view. This point of view is one among various, 
corresponding to one among our various interests and purposes.  
 
Notes  
1 The impulse to distinguish terminologically between existence as applied to objects actualized 
somewhere in space-time and existence (or subsistence or being) as applied to other entities arises 
in part, perhaps, from an idea that the observation of nature is relevant only to questions of 
existence of the first kind. But this idea is readily refuted by counterinstances such as ‘the ratio of 
the number of centaurs to the number of unicorns’. If there were such a ratio, it would be an 
abstract entity, viz. a number. Yet it is only by studying nature that we conclude that the number 
of centaurs and the number of unicorns are both 0 and hence that there is no such ratio.  
2 see below, p. 152.  
3 For more on the theory of descriptions see below, pp. 85f, 166f.  
4 For more explicit treatment of the bound variable see below, pp. 82, 102f.  
5 For further remarks on such assimilation of all singular terms to descriptions see below, p. 167; 
also Quine [2], pp. 218-224.  
6 See Essays II and III.  
7 For more on this topic see Essay VI.  
8 See below, pp. 125ff.  
9 See Goodman and Quine. For further discussion of the general matters touched on in the past two 
pages, see Bernays [l], Fraenkel, Black.  
10 The arithmetical analogy is due to Frank, pp. 108f.  
11 See below, pp. 90ff, 96ff, 122ff.  